The first oration against Verres
That which was above all things to be desired, O judges, and which above all things was calculated to have the greatest influence towards allaying the unpopularity of your order, and putting an end to the discredit into which your judicial decisions have fallen, appears to have been thrown in your way, and given to you not by any human contrivance, but almost by the interposition of the gods, at a most important crisis of the republic.
For an opinion has now become established, pernicious to us, and pernicious to the republic, which has been the common talk of every one, not only at Rome, but among foreign nations also, that in the courts of law as they exist at present, no wealthy man, however guilty he may be, can possibly be convicted.
Now at this time of peril to your order and to your tribunals, when men are ready to attempt by harangues, and by the proposal of new laws, to increase the existing unpopularity of the senate, Caius Verres is brought to trial as a criminal, a man condemned in the opinion of every one by his life and actions, but acquitted by the enormousness of his wealth according to his own hope and boast.
I, O judges, have undertaken this cause as prosecutor with the greatest good wishes and expectation on the part of the Roman people, not in order to increase the unpopularity of the senate, but to relieve it from the discredit which I share with it.
For I have brought before you a man, by acting justly in whose case you have an opportunity of retrieving the lost credit of your judicial proceedings, of regaining your credit with the Roman people, and of giving satisfaction to foreign nations; a man, the embezzler of the public funds, the petty tyrant of Asia and Pamphylia, the robber who deprived the city of its rights, the disgrace and ruin of the province of Sicily.
And if you come to a decision about this man with severity and a due regard to your oaths, that authority which ought to remain in you will cling to you still;
but if that man's vast riches shall break down the sanctity and honesty of the courts of justice, at least I shall achieve this, that it shall be plain that it was rather honest judgment that was wanting to the republic, than a criminal to the judges, or an accuser to the criminal.
I, indeed, that I may confess to you the truth about myself, O judges, though many snares were laid for me by Caius Verres, both by land and sea, which I partly avoided by my own vigilance, and partly warded off by the zeal and kindness of my friends, yet I never seemed to be incurring so much danger, and I never was in such a state of great apprehension, as I am now in this very court of law.
Nor does the expectation which people have formed of my conduct of this prosecution, nor this concourse of so vast a multitude as is here assembled, influence me (though indeed I am greatly agitated by these circumstances) so much as his nefarious plots which he is endeavouring to lay at one and the same time against me, against you, against Marcus Gabrio the praetor, and against the allies, against foreign nations, against the senate, and even against the very name of senator;
whose favourite saying it is that they have got to fear who have stolen only as much as is enough for themselves, but that he has stolen so much that it may easily be plenty for many; that nothing is so holy that it cannot be corrupted, or so strongly fortified that it cannot be stormed by money.
But if he were as secret in acting as he is audacious in attempting, perhaps in some particular he might some time or other have escaped our notice.
But it happens very fortunately that to his incredible audacity there is joined a most unexampled folly. For as he was unconcealed in committing his robberies of money, so in his hope of corrupting the judges he has made his intentions and endeavours visible to every one.
He says that once only in his life has he felt fear: at the time when he was first impeached as a criminal by me; because he was only lately arrived from his province, and was branded with unpopularity and infamy, not modern but ancient and of long standing; and, besides that, the time was unlucky, being very ill-suited for corrupting the judges.
Therefore, when I had demanded a very short time to prosecute my inquiries in Sicily, he found a man to ask for two days less to make investigations in Achaia; not with any real intention of doing the same with his diligence and industry, that I have accomplished by my labour, and daily and nightly investigations.
For the Achaean inquisitor never even arrived at Brundusium. I in fifty days so traveled over the whole of Sicily that I examined into the records and injuries of all the tribes and of all private individuals, so that it was easily visible to every one, that he had been seeking out a man not really for the purpose of bringing the defendant whom he accused to trial, but merely to occupy the time which ought to belong to me.
Now that most audacious and most senseless man thinks this.
He is aware that I am come into court so thoroughly prepared and armed, that I shall fix all his thefts and crimes not only in your ears, but in the very eyes of all men.
He sees that many senators are witnesses of his audacity, he sees that many Roman knights are so too, and many citizens, and many of the allies besides to whom he has done unmistakable injuries. He sees also that very numerous and very important deputations have come here at the same time from most friendly cities, armed with the public authority and evidence collected by their states.
And though this is the case, still he thinks so ill of all virtuous men, to such an extent does he believe the decisions of the senators to be corrupt and profligate, that he makes a custom of openly boasting that it was not without reason that he was greedy of money, since he now finds that there is such protection in money, and that he has bought (what was the hardest thing of all) the very time of his trial, in order to be able to buy everything else more easily;
so that, as he could not by any possibility shirk the force of the accusations altogether, he might avoid the most violent gusts of the storm.
But if he had placed any hope at all, not only in his cause, but in any honourable defence, or in the eloquence or in the influence of any one, he would not be so eager in collecting and catching at all these things; he would not scorn and despise the senatorial body to such a degree, as to procure a man to be selected out of the senate at his will to be made a criminal of, who should plead his cause before him, while he in the meantime was preparing whatever he had need of.
And what the circumstances are on which he founds his hopes, and what hopes he builds on them, and what he is fixing his mind on.
I see clearly. But how he can have the confidence to think that he can effect anything with the present praetor, and the present bench of Judges, I cannot conceive.
This one thing I know, which the Roman people perceived too when he rejected the judges, that his hopes were of that nature that he placed all his expectations of safety in his money;
and that if this protection were taken from him, he thought nothing would be any help to him. In truth, what genius is there so powerful, what faculty of speaking, what eloquence so mighty, as to be in any particular able to defend the life of that man, convicted as it is of so many vices and crimes, and long since condemned by the inclinations and private sentiments of every one?
And, to say nothing of the stains and disgraces of his youth, what other remarkable event is there in his quaestorship, that first step to honour, except that Cnaeus Carbo was robbed by his quaestor of the public money? that the consul was plundered and betrayed? his army deserted? his province abandoned? the holy nature and obligations imposed on him by lot violated?
whose lieutenancy was the ruin of all Asia and Pamphylia, in which provinces he plundered many houses, very many cities, all the shrines and temples; when he renewed and repeated against Cnaeus Dolabella his ancient wicked tricks when he had been quaestor, and did not only in his danger desert, but even attack and betray the man to whom he had been lieutenant, and proquaestor, and whom he had brought into odium by his crimes; whose only praetorship was the destruction of the sacred temples and the public works, and, as to his legal decisions, was the adjudging and awarding of property contrary to all established rules and precedents.
But now he has established great and numerous monuments and proofs of all his vices in the province of Sicily, which he for three years so harassed and ruined that it can by no possibility be restored to its former condition, and appears scarcely able to be at all recovered after a long series of years, and a long succession of virtuous praetors.
While this man was praetor the Sicilians enjoyed neither their own laws, nor the degrees of our senate, nor the common rights of every nation.
Every one in Sicily has only so much left as either escaped the notice or was disregarded by the satiety of that most avaricious and licentious man.
No legal decision for three years was given on any other ground but his will; no property was so secure to any man, even if it had descended to him from his father and grandfather, but he was deprived of it at his command;
enormous sums of money were exacted from the property of the cultivators of the soil by a new and nefarious system.
The most faithful of the allies were classed in the number of enemies.
Roman citizens were tortured and put to death like slaves; the greatest criminals were acquitted in the courts of justice through bribery; the most upright and honourable men, being prosecuted while absent, were condemned and banished without being heard in their own defence;
the most fortified harbours, the greatest and strongest cities, were laid open to pirates and robbers; the sailors and soldiers of the Sicilians, our own allies and friends, died of hunger; the best built fleets on the most important stations were lost and destroyed, to the great disgrace of the Roman people.
This same man while praetor plundered and stripped those most ancient monuments, some erected by wealthy monarchs and intended by them as ornaments for their cities; some, too, the work of our own generals, which they either gave or restored as conquerors to the different states in Sicily.
And he did this not only in the case of public statues and ornaments, but he also plundered all the temples consecrated in the deepest religious feelings of the people. He did not leave, in short, one god to the Sicilians which appeared to him to be made in a tolerably workmanlike manner, and with any of the skill of the ancients.
I am prevented by actual shame from speaking of his nefarious licentiousness as shown in rapes and other such enormities; and I am unwilling also to increase the distress of those men who have been unable to preserve their children and their wives unpolluted by his wanton lust.
But, you will say, these things were done by him in such a manner as not to be notorious to all men.
I think there is no man who has heard his name who cannot also relate wicked actions of his; so that I ought rather to be afraid of being thought to omit many of his crimes, than to invent any charges against him.
And indeed I do not think that this multitude which has collected to listen to me wishes so much to learn of me what the facts of the case are, as to go over it with me, refreshing its recollection of what it knows already.
And as this is the case, that senseless and profligate man attempts to combat me in another manner.
He does not seek to oppose the eloquence of any one also to me, he does not rely on the popularity, or influence, or authority of any one.
He pretends that he trusts to these things; but I see what he is really aiming at; (and indeed he is not acting with any concealment.)
He sets before me empty titles of nobility, that is to say the names of arrogant men, who do not hinder me so much by being noble, as assist me by being notorious, he pretends to rely on their protection; when he has in reality been contriving something else this long time.
What hope he now has, and what he is endeavouring to do, I will now briefly explain to you, O judges.
But first of all, remark, I beg you, how the matter has been arranged by him from the beginning.
When he first returned from the province, he endeavoured to get rid of this prosecution by corrupting the judges at a great expense;
and this object he continued to keep in view till the conclusion of the appointment of the judges.
After the judges were appointed because in drawing lots for them the fortune of the Roman people had defeated his hopes, and because in rejecting some, my diligence had defeated his impudence the whole attempt at bribery was abandoned.
The affair was going on admirably;
lists of your names and of the whole tribunal were in every one's hands.
It did not seem possible to mark the votes of these men with any distinguishing mark or colour or spot of dirt; and that fellow, from having been brisk and in high spirits, became on a sudden so downcast and humbled, that he seemed to be condemned not only by the Roman people but even by himself. But lo!
all of a sudden, within these few days, since the consular comitia have taken place, he has gone back to his original plan with more money, and the same plots are now laid against your reputation and against the fortunes of every one, by the instrumentality of the same people;
which fact at first, O judges, was pointed out to me by a very slight hint and indication; but afterwards, when my suspicions were once aroused, I arrived at the knowledge of all the most secret counsels of that party without any mistake.
For as Hortensius the consul elect was being attended home again from the Campus by a great concourse and multitude of people, Caius Curio fell in with that multitude by chance, a man whom I wish to name by way of honour rather than of disparagement.
I will tell you what, if he had been unwilling to have it mentioned, he would not have spoken of in so large an assembly so openly and undisguisedly; which, however, shall be mentioned by me deliberately and cautiously, that it may be seen that I pay due regard to our friendship and to his dignity.
He sees Verres in the crowd by the arch of Fabius; he speaks to the man, and with a loud voice congratulates him on his victory.
He does not say a word to Hortensius himself, who had been made consul, or to his friends and relations who were present attending on him; but he stops to speak to this man, embraces him, and bids him cast off all anxiety.
I give you notice, said he, that you have been acquitted by this day's comitia.
And as many most honourable men heard this, it is immediately reported to me; indeed, every one who saw me mentioned it to me the first thing.	"
To some it appeared scandalous, to others ridiculous; ridiculous to those who thought that this cause depended on the credibility of the witnesses, on the importance of the charges, and on the power of the judges, and not on the consular comitia; scandalous to those who looked deeper, and who thought that this congratulation had reference to the corruption of the judge.
In truth, they argued in this manner the most honourable men spoke to one another and to me in this manner that there were now manifestly and undeniably no courts of justice at all.
The very criminal who the day before thought that he was already condemned, is acquitted now that his defender has been made consul.
What are we to think then?
Will it avail nothing that all Sicily, all the Sicilians, that all the merchants who have business in that country, that all public and private documents are now at Rome?
Nothing, if the consul elect wills it otherwise.
What!
will not the judges be influenced by the accusation, by the evidence, by the universal opinion of the Roman people? No.
Everything will be governed by the power and authority of one man.
I will speak the truth, O judges. This thing agitated me greatly; for every good man was speaking in this way "That fellow will be taken out of your hands; but we shall not preserve our judicial authority much longer; for who, when Verres is acquitted, will be able to make any objection to transferring it from us?"
It was a grievous thing to every one, and the sudden elation of that profligate man did not weigh with them as much as that fresh congratulation of a very honourable one.
I wished to dissemble my own vexation at it; I wished to conceal my own grief of mind under a cheerful countenance, and to bury it in silence.
But lo! on the very days when the praetors elected were dividing their duties by lot, and when it fell to the share of Marcus Metellus to hold trials concerning extortion, information is given me that that fellow was receiving such congratulations, that he also sent men home to announce it to his wife.
And this too in truth displeased me; and yet I was not quite aware what I had so much to fear from this allotment of the praetor's duties.
But I ascertained this one thing from trustworthy men from whom I received all my intelligence; that many chests full of Sicilian money had been sent by some senator to a Roman knight, and that of these about ten chests had been left at that senator's house, with the statement that they were left to be used in the comitia when I expected to be elected aedile, and that men to distribute this money among all the tribes had been summoned to attend him by night.
Of whom one, who thought himself under the greatest obligations to me, came to me that same night; reports to me the speech which that fellow had addressed to them; that he had reminded them how liberally he had treated them formerly when he was candidate for the praetorship, and at the last consular and praetorian comitia; and in the second place that he had promised them immediately whatever money they required, if they could procure my rejection from the aedileship.
That on this some of them said that they did not dare attempt it; that others answered that they did not think it could be managed; but that one bold friend was found, a man of the same family as himself, Quintus Verres, of the Romilian tribe, of the most perfect school of bribers, the pupil and friend of Verres' father, who promised that, if five hundred thousand sesterces were provided, he would manage it; and that there were some others who said that they would cooperate with him.
And as this was the case, he warned me beforehand with a friendly disposition, to take great care.
I was disquieted about many most important matters at one and the same moment, and with very little time to deliberate.
The comitia were at hand; and at them I was to be opposed at immense expenditure of money.
This trial was at hand; the Sicilian treasurers menaced that matter also.
I was afraid, from apprehension about the comitia, to conduct the matters relating to the trial with freedom; and because of the trial, I was unable to attend with all my heart to my canvass.
Threatening the agents of bribery was out of the question, because I saw that they were aware that I was hampered and fettered by this trial.
And at this same moment I hear that notice has been given to the Sicilians by Hortensius to come to speak to him at his house; that the Sicilians behaved in that matter with a proper sense of their own liberty, and, when they understood on what account they were sent for, they would not go.
In the meantime my comitia began to be held; of which that fellow thought himself the master, as he had been of all the other comitia this year.
The son began to address and to call on all the friends of his father, that is to say, all his agents for bribery;
and when this was noticed and perceived, the Roman people took care with the most earnest goodwill that I should not be deprived of my honour through the money of that man, whose riches had not been able to make me violate my good faith.
After that I was released from that great anxiety about my canvass, I began, with a mind much more unoccupied and much more at ease, to think of nothing and to do nothing except what related to this trial.
I find, O judges, these plans formed and begun to be put in execution by them, to protract the matter, whatever steps it might be necessary to take in order to do so, so that the cause might be pleaded before Marcus Metellus as praetor.
That by doing so they would have these advantages; firstly, that Marcus Metellus was most friendly to them; secondly, that not only would Hortensius be consul, but Quintus Metellus also: and listen while I show you how great a friend he is to them.
For he gave him a token of his goodwill of such a sort, that he seemed to be giving it as a return for the suffrages of the tribes which he had scoured to him.
Did you think that I would say nothing of such serious matters as these? and that, at a crisis of such danger to the republic and my own character, I would consult anything rather than my duty and my dignity?
The other consul elect sent for the Sicilians; some came, because Lucius Metellus was praetor in Sicily.
To them he speaks in this manner: that he is the consul; that one of his brothers has Sicily for his province; that the other is to be judge in all prosecutions for extortion; and that care had been taken in many ways that there should be no possibility of Verres being injured.
I ask you, Metellus, what is corrupting the course of justice, if this is not, to seek to frighten witnesses, and especially Sicilians, timid and oppressed men, not only by your own private influence, but by their fear of the consul, and by the power of two praetors?
What would you do for an innocent man or for a relation, when for the sake of a most guilty man, entirely unconnected with you, you depart from your duty and your dignity, and allow what he is constantly saying to appear true to any one who is not acquainted with you?
For they said that Verres said, that you had not been made consul by destiny, as the rest of your family had been, but by his assistance.
Two consuls, therefore, and the judge are to be such because of his will.
We shall not only, says he, avoid having a man too scrupulous in investigating, too subservient to the opinion of the people, Marcus Glabrio, but we shall have this advantage also:
Marcus Caesonius is the judge, the colleague of our accuser a man of tried and proved experience in the decision of actions.
It will never do for us to have such a man as that on the bench, which we are endeavouring to corrupt by some means or other; for before, when he was one of the Judges on the tribunal of which Junius was president, he was not only very indignant at that shameful transaction, but he even betrayed and denounced it.
After the first of January we shall not have this man for our judge, we shall not have Quintus Manlius and Quintus Cornificius, two most severe and upright judges, for judges, because they will then be tribunes of the people.
Publius Sulpicius, a solemn and upright judge, must enter on his magistracy on the fifth of November.
Marcus Crepereius, of that renowned equestrian family and of that incorruptible character; Lucius Cassius, of a family renowned for its severity in all things, and especially as judges; Cnaeus Tremellius, a man of the greatest scrupulousness and diligence; these three men of ancient strictness of principle are all military tribunes elect. After the first of January they will not be able to act as judges.
And besides this, we elect by lot a successor in the room of Marcus Metellus, since he is to preside over this very trial.
And so after the first of January, the praetor, and almost the whole bench of judges being changed, we shall elude the terrible threats of the prosecutor, and the great expectations entertained of this trial, and manage it according to our own will and pleasure.
Today is the fifth of August. You began to assemble at the ninth hour.
This day they do not even count.
There are ten days between this and the votive games which Cnaeus Pompeius is going to celebrate.
These games will take up fifteen days; then immediately the Roman games will follow.
And so, when nearly forty days have intervened, then at length they think they shall have to answer what has been said by us; and they think that, what with speeches, and what with excuses, they will easily be able to protract the cause till the period of the games of Victory.
With these the plebeian games are connected, after which there will be either no day at all, or very few for pleading in. And so, when the accusation has got stale and cold, the matter will come all fresh before Marcus Metellus as praetor. And if I had distrusted his good faith, I should not have retained him as a judge.
But now I have such an opinion of him, that I would rather this matter was brought to a close while he is judge than while he is praetor; and I would rather entrust to him his own tablet while he is on his oath, than the tablets of others when he is restrained by no such obligation.
Now, O judges, I consult you as to what you think I ought to do.
For you will, in truth, without speaking, give me that advice which I understand that I must inevitably adopt.
If I occupy the time which I legitimately might in speaking, I shall reap the fruit of my labour, industry, and diligence; and by this prosecution I shall make it manifest that no one in the memory of man appears ever to have come before a court of justice better prepared, more vigilant, or with his cause better got up.
But while I am getting this credit for my industry, there is great danger lest the criminal may escape.
What, then, is there which can be done?
I think it is neither obscure nor hidden.
I will reserve for another time that fruit of praise which may be derived from a long uninterrupted speech.
At present I must support this accusation by documentary evidence, by witnesses, by letters of private individuals and of public bodies, and by various other kinds of proof.
The whole of this contest is between you and me, O Hortensius.
I will speak openly.
If I thought that you were contending with me in the matter of speaking, and of getting rid of the charges I bring against your client in this cause, I, too, would devote much pains to mounting an elaborate accusation, and to dilating on my charges.
Now, since you have determined to contend against me with artifice, not so much in obedience to the promptings of your own nature, as from consulting his occasions and his cause, it is necessary for me to oppose conduct of that sort with prudence.
Your plan is, to begin to answer me after two sets of games have been celebrated; mine is to have the adjournment over before the first series.
And the result will be, that that plan of yours will be thought crafty, but this determination of mine necessary.
But as for what I had begun to say, namely, that the contest is between you and me, this is it,
I, when I had undertaken this cause at the request of the Sicilians, and had thought it a very honourable and glorious thing for me that they were willing to make experiment of my integrity and diligence, who already knew by experience my innocence and temperance: then, when I had undertaken this business, I proposed to myself some greater action also by which the Roman people should be able to see my goodwill towards the republic.
For that seemed to me to be by no means worthy of my industry and efforts, for that man to be brought to trial by me who had been already condemned by the judgment of all men, unless that intolerable influence of yours, and that grasping nature which you have displayed for some years in many trials, was interposed also in the case of that desperate man.
But no, since all this dominion and sovereignty of yours over the courts of justice delights you so much, and since there are some men who are neither ashamed of their licentiousness and their infamy, nor weary of it, and who, as if on purpose, seem to wish to encounter hatred and unpopularity from the Roman people,
I profess that I have undertaken this, a great burden perhaps, and one dangerous to myself, but still worthy of my applying myself to it with all the vigour of my age, and all diligence.
And since the whole order of the senate is weighed down by the discredit brought on it by the wickedness and audacity of a few, and is overwhelmed by the infamy of the tribunals, I profess myself an enemy to this race of men, an accuser worthy of their hatred, a persevering, a bitter adversary.
I arrogate this to myself, I claim this for myself, and I will carry out this enmity in my magistracy, and from that post in which the Roman people has willed that from the next first of January I shall act in concert with it in matters concerning the republic, and concerning wicked men.
I promise the Roman people that this shall be the most honourable and the fairest employment of my aedileship.
I warn, I forewarn, I give notice beforehand to those men who are wont either to put money down, to undertake for others, to receive money, or to promise money, or to act as agents in bribery, or as go-betweens in corrupting the seat of judgment, and who have promised their influence or their impudence in aid of such a business, in this trial to keep their hands and inclinations from this nefarious wickedness.
 Hortensius will then be consul with the chief command and authority, but I shall be aedile that is, I shall be a little more than a private individual; and yet this business, which I promise that I am going to advocate, is of such a nature, so pleasing and agreeable to the Roman people, that the consul himself will appear in this cause, if that be possible, even less than a private individual in comparison of me.
All those things shall not only be mentioned, but even, where certain matters have been explained, shall be fully discussed, which for the last ten years, ever since the office of the judge has been transferred to the senate, has been nefariously and wickedly done in the decision of judicial matters.
The Roman people shall know from me why it is that when the equestrian body supplied the judges for nearly fifty years together, not even the slightest suspicion ever arose of bribes having been accepted for the purpose of influencing a decision;
why it is, I say, when the judicial authority was transferred to the senatorial body, and the power of the Roman people over every one of us was taken away, Quintus Calidius, when he was condemned, said that a man of praetorian rank could not honestly be condemned at a less price than three hundred thousand sesterces;
why it is that when Publius Septimius, a senator, was condemned for extortion, when Quintus Hortensius was praetor, damages were assessed against him, including money which he had received as judge to decide causes which came before him;
why it is, that in the case of Caius Herennius, and in that of Caius Popillius, senators, both of whom were convicted of peculation why it is, that in the case of Marcus Atilius, who was convicted of treason this was made plain, that they had all received money for the purpose of influencing their judicial decisions;
why it is, that senators have been found who, when Caius Verres, as praetor of the city, gave out the lots, voted against the criminal whom they were condemning without having inquired into his case; why it is, that a senator was found who, when he was judge, took money in one and the same trial both from the defendant to distribute among the judges, and from the accuser to condemn the defendant.
But how shall I adequately complain of that stain, that disgrace, that calamity of the whole senatorial order, that this thing actually happened in the city while the senatorial order furnished the judges, that the votes of men on their oaths were marked by coloured tablets?
I pledge myself that I will urge all these things with diligence and with strictness.
And what do you suppose will be my thoughts, if I find in this very trial any violation of the laws committed in any similar manner?
especially when I can prove by many witnesses that Caius Verres often said in Sicily, in the hearing of many persons, "that he had a powerful friend, in confidence in whom he was plundering the province;
and that he was not seeking money for himself alone, but that he had so distributed the three years of his Sicilian praetorship, that he should say he did exceedingly well, if he appropriated the gains of one year to the augmentation of his own property, those of the second year to his patrons and defenders, and reserved the whole of the third year, the most productive and gainful of all, for the judges."
From which it came into my mind to say that which, when I had said lately before Marcus Glabrio at the time of striking the list of judges, I perceived the Roman people greatly moved by; that I thought that foreign nations would send ambassadors to the Roman people to procure the abrogation of the law, and of all trials, about extortion;
for if there were no trials, they think that each man would only plunder them of as much as he would think sufficient for himself and his children; but now, because there are trials of that sort, every one carries off as much as it will take to satisfy himself, his patrons, his advocates, the praetor, and the judges; and that this is an enormous sum;
that they may be able to satisfy the cupidity of one most avaricious man, but are quite unable to incur the expense of his most guilty victory over the laws.
O trials worthy of being recorded! O splendid reputation of our order!
when the allies of the Roman people are unwilling that trials for extortion should take place, which were instituted by our ancestors for the sake of the allies.
Would that man ever have had a favourable hope of his own safety, if he had not conceived in his mind a bad opinion of you?
on which account, he ought, if possible, to be still more hated by you than he is by the Roman people, because he considers you like himself in avarice and wickedness and perjury.
 And I beg you, in the name of the immortal gods, O judges, think of and guard against this; I warn you, I give notice to you, of what I am well assured, that this most seasonable opportunity has been given to you by the favour of the gods, for the purpose of delivering your whole order from hatred, from unpopularity, from infamy, and from disgrace.
There is no severity believed to exist ill the tribunals, nor any scruples with regard to religion; in short, there are not believed to be any tribunals at all.
Therefore we are despised and scorned by the Roman people; we are branded with a heavy and now a long standing infamy.
Nor, in fact, is there any other reason for which the Roman people has with so much earnestness sought the restoration of the tribunician power: but when it was demanding that in words, it seemed to be asking for that, but in reality it was asking for tribunes which it could trust.
And this did not escape the notice of Quintus Catulus, a most sagacious and honourable man,
who, when Cnaeus Pompeius, a most gallant and illustrious man, made a motion about the tribunitian power, and when he was asked his opinion, begin his speech in this manner, speaking with the greatest authority, "that the conscript fathers presided over the courts of justice badly and wickedly; but if in deciding judicial trials they had been willing to satisfy the expectations of the Roman people, men would not so greatly regret the tribunitian power?"
Lastly, when Cnaeus Pompeius himself, when first he delivered an address to the people as consul elect, mentioned (what seemed above all things to be watched for) that he would restore the power of the tribunes, a great shout was raised at his words, and a grateful murmur pervaded the assembly.
And when he had said also in the same assembly "that the provinces were depopulated and tyrannised over, that the courts of justice were become base and wicked, and that he desired to provide for and to remedy that evil," the Roman people then signified their good will, not with a shout, but with a universal uproar.
 But now men are on the watch towers; they observe how every one of you behaves himself in respecting religion and in preserving the laws.
They see that, ever since the passing of the law for restoring the power of the tribunes, only one senator, and he too a very insignificant one, has been condemned. And though they do nor blame this, yet they have nothing which they can very much commend.
For there is no credit in being upright in a case where there is no one who is either able or who endeavours to corrupt one.
This is a trial in which you will be deciding about the defendant, the Roman people about you; by the example of what happens to this man it will be determined whether, when senators are the judges, a very guilty and a very rich man can be condemned.
Moreover, he is a criminal of such a sort, that there is absolutely nothing whatever in him except the greatest crimes, and excessive riches; so that if he be acquitted, no other opinion can be formed of the matter except that which is the most discreditable possible.
Such numerous and enormous vices as his will not be considered to have been canceled by influence, by family connection, by some things which may have been done well, or even by the minor vices of flattery and subservience.
In short, I will conduct the cause in this manner; I will bring forward things of such a sort, so well known, so proved by evidence, so important, and so undeniable, that no one shall venture to use his influence to obtain from you the acquittal of that man;
for I have a sure path and method by which I can investigate and become acquainted with all their endeavours.
The matter will be so managed by me that not only the ears but even the eyes of the Roman people shall seem to be present at all their counsels.
You have in your power to remove and to eradicate the disgrace and infamy which has now for many years attached to your order.
It is evident to all men, that since these tribunals have been established which we now have, there has never been a bench of judges of the same splendour and dignity as this.
If anything is done wrongly in this case, all men will think not that other more capable judges should be appointed of the same order of men, which is not possible; but that another order must be sought for, from which to select the judges for the future.
 On which account, in the first place, I beg this of the immortal gods, which I seem to myself to have hopes of too, that in this trial no one may be found to be wicked except him who has long since been found to be such; secondly, if there are many wicked men, I promise this to you, O judges, I promise this to the Roman people, that my life shall fail rather than my vigour and perseverance in prosecuting their iniquity.
But that iniquity, which, if it should be committed, I promise to prosecute severely, with however much trouble and danger to myself, and whatever enmities I may bring on myself by so doing, you, O Marcus Glabrio, can guard against ever taking place by your wisdom, and authority, and diligence.
Do you undertake the cause of the tribunals.
Do you undertake the cause of impartiality, of integrity, of good faith and of religion.
Do you undertake the cause of the senate; that, being proved worthy by its conduct in this trial, it may come into favour and popularity with the Roman people.
Think who you are, and in what a situation you are placed; what you ought to give to the Roman people, what you ought to repay to your ancestors.
Let the recollection of the Acilian law passed by your father occur to your mind, owing to which law the Roman people has had this advantage of most admirable decisions and very strict judges in cases of extortion.
High authorities surround you which will not suffer you to forget your family credit; which will remind you day and night that your father was a most brave man, your grandfather a most wise one, and your father-in-law a most worthy man.
Wherefore, if you have inherited the vigour and energy of your father Glabrio in resisting audacious men; if you have inherited the prudence of your grandfather Scaevola in foreseeing intrigues which are prepared against your fame and that of your fellow-judges; if you have any share of the constancy of your father-in-law Scaurus, so that no one can move you from your genuine and deliberate opinion,
the Roman people will understand that with an upright and honourable praetor, and a carefully selected bench of judges, abundance of wealth has more influence in bringing a criminal into suspicion, than in contributing to his safety.
 I am resolved not to permit the praetor or the judges to be hanged in this cause.
I will not permit the matter to be delayed till the lictors of the consuls can go and summon the Sicilians, whom the servants of the consuls elect did not influence before, when by an unprecedented course of proceeding they sent for them all; I will not permit those miserable men, formerly the allies and friends of the Roman people, now their slaves and suppliants, to lose not only their rights and fortunes by their tyranny, but to be deprived of even the power of bewailing their condition;
I will not, I say, when the cause has been summed up by me, permit them after a delay of forty days has intervened, then at last to reply to me when my accusation has already fallen into oblivion through lapse of time;
I will not permit the decision to be given when this crowd collected from all Italy has departed from Rome, which has assembled from all quarters at the same time on account of the comitia, of the games, and of the census.
The reward of the credit gained by your decision, or the danger arising from the unpopularity which will accrue to you if you decide unjustly, I think ought to belong to you; the labour and anxiety to me; the knowledge of what is done and the recollection of what has been said by every one, to all.
I will adopt this course, not an unprecedented one, but one that has been adopted before, by those who are now the chief men of our state, the course, I mean, of at once producing the witnesses.
What you will find novel, O judges, is this, that I will so marshal my witnesses as to unfold the whole of my accusation; that when I have established it by examining my witnesses, by arguments, and by my speech, then I shall show the agreement of the evidence with my accusation:
so that there shall be no difference between the established mode of prosecuting, and this new one, except that, according to the established mode, when everything has been said which is to be said, then the witnesses are produced; here they shall be produced as each count is brought forward; so that the other side shall have the same opportunity of examining them, of arguing and making speeches or their evidence.
If there be any one who prefers an uninterrupted speech and the old mode of conducting a prosecution without any break, he shall have it in some other trial.
But for this time let him understand that what we do is done by us on compulsion, (for we only do it with the design of opposing the artifice of the opposite party by our prudence.)
This will be the first part of the prosecution.
We say that Caius Verres has not only done many licentious acts, many cruel ones, towards Roman citizens, and towards some of the allies, many wicked acts against both gods and men; but especially that he has taken away four hundred thousand sesterces out of Sicily contrary to the laws.
We will make this so plain to you by witnesses, by private documents, and by public records that you shall decide that, even if we had abundant space and leisure days for making a long speech without any inconvenience, still there was no need at all of a long speech in this matter.
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE SECOND PLEADING AGAINST CAIUS VERRES.
RESPECTING HIS CONDUCT IN THE CITY PRAETORSHIP.
I think that no one of you, O judges, is ignorant that for these many days the discourse of the populace, and the opinion of the Roman people, has been that Caius Verres would not appear a second time before the bench to reply to my charges, and would not again present himself in court; And this idea had not got about merely because he had deliberately determined and resolved not to appear, but because no one believed that any one would be so audacious, so frantic, and so impudent, as, after having been convicted of such nefarious crimes, and by so many witnesses, to venture to present himself to the eyes of the judges, or to show his face to the Roman people.
But he is the same Verres that he always was; as he was abandoned enough to dare, so he is hardened enough to listen to anything.
He is present; he replies to us; he makes his defence. He does not even leave himself this much of character, to be supposed, by being silent and keeping out of the way when he is so visibly convicted of the most infamous conduct, to have sought for a modest escape for his impudence.
I can endure this, O judges, and I am not vexed that I am to receive the reward of my labours, and you the reward of your virtue.
For if he had done what he at first determined to, that is, had not appeared, it would have been somewhat less known than is desirable for me what pains I had taken in preparing and arranging this prosecution: and your praise, O judges, would have been exceedingly slight and little heard of.
For this is not what the Roman people is expecting from you, nor what it can be contented with, namely, for a man to be condemned who refuses to appear, and for you to act with resolution in the case of a man whom nobody has dared to defend.
Aye, let him appear, let him reply; let him be defended with the utmost influence and the utmost zeal of the most powerful men, let my diligence have to contend with the covetousness of all of them, your integrity with his riches, the consistency of the witnesses with the threats and power of his patrons. Then indeed those things will be seen to be overcome when they have come to the contest and to the struggle.
But if he had been condemned in his absence, he would have appeared not so much to have consulted his own advantage as to have grudged you your credit.
For neither can there be any greater safety for the republic imagined at this time, than for the Roman people to understand that, if all unworthy judges are carefully rejected by the accusers, the allies, the laws, and the republic can be thoroughly defended by a bench of judges chosen from the senators;
nor can any such injury to the fortunes of all happen, as for all regard for truth, for integrity, for good faith, and for religion to be, in the opinion of the Roman people, cast aside by the senatorial body.
And therefore, I seem to myself, O judges, to have undertaken to uphold an important, and very failing, and almost neglected part of the republic, and by so doing to be acting not more for the benefit of my own reputation than of yours.
For I have come forward to diminish the unpopularity of the courts of justice, and to remove the reproaches which are levelled at them; in order that, when this cause has been decided according to the wish of the Roman people, the authority of the courts of justice may appear to have been re-established in some degree by my diligence; and in order that this matter may be so decided that an end may be put at length to the controversy about the tribunals;
and, indeed, beyond all question, O judges, that matter depends on your decision in this cause.
For the criminal is most guilty.
And if he be condemned, men will cease to say that money is all powerful with the present tribunal; but if he be acquitted we shall cease to be able to make any objection to transferring the tribunal to another body.
Although that fellow has not in reality any hope, nor the Roman people any fear of his acquittal, there are some men who do marvel at his singular impudence in being present, in replying to the accusations brought against him;
but to me even this does not appear marvellous in comparison with his other actions of audacity and madness.
For he has done many impious and nefarious actions both against gods and men; by the punishment for which crimes he is now disquieted and driven out of his mind and out of his senses.
The punishments of Roman citizens are driving him mad, some of whom he has delivered to the executioner, others he has put to death in prison, others he has crucified while demanding their rights as freemen and as Roman citizens.
The gods of his fathers are hurrying him away to punishment, because he alone has been found to lead to execution sons torn from the embraces of their fathers, and to demand of parents payment for leave to bury their sons.
The reverence due to, and the holy ceremonies practiced in, every shrine and every temple but all violated by him; and the images of the gods, which have not only been taken away from their temples, but which are even lying in darkness, having been cast aside and thrown away by him do not allow his mind to rest free from frenzy and madness.
Nor does he appear to me merely to offer himself to condemnation, nor to be content with the common punishment of avarice, when he has involved himself in so many atrocities; his savage and monstrous nature wishes for some extraordinary punishment.
It is not alone demanded that, by his condemnation, their property may be restored to those from whom it has been taken away; but the insults offered to the religion of the immortal gods must be expiated, and the tortures of Roman citizens, and the blood of many innocent men, must be atoned for by that man's punishment.
For we have brought before your tribunal not only a thief, but a wholesale robber; not only an adulterer, but a ravisher of chastity; not only a sacrilegious man, but an open enemy to all sacred things and all religion; not only an assassin, but a most barbarous murderer of both citizens and allies; so that I think him the only criminal in the memory of man so atrocious, that it is even for his own good to be condemned.
For who is there who does not see this, that though he be acquitted, against the will of gods and men, yet that he cannot possibly be taken out of the hands of the Roman people?
Who does not see that it would be an excellent thing for us in that case, if the Roman people were content with the punishment of that one criminal alone, and did not decide that he had not committed any greater wickedness against them when he plundered temples, when he murdered so many innocent men, when he destroyed Roman citizens by execution, by torture, by the cross, when he released leaders of banditti for bribes,
than they, who, when on their oaths, acquitted a man covered with so many, with such enormous, with such unspeakable wickednesses?
There is, there is, O judges, no room for any one to err in respect of this man.
He is not such a criminal, this is not such a time, this is not such a tribunal, (I fear to seem to say anything too arrogant before such men,) even the advocate is not such a man, that a criminal so guilty, so abandoned, so plainly convicted, can be either stealthily or openly snatched out of his hands with impunity.
When such men as these are judges, shall I not be able to prove that Caius Verres has taken bribes contrary to the laws?
Will such men venture to assert that they have not believed so many senators, so many Roman knights, so many cities, so many men of the highest honour from so illustrious a province, so many letters of whole nations and of private individuals?
that they have resisted so general a wish of the Roman people?
Let them venture.
We will find, if we are able to bring that fellow alive before another tribunal, men to whom we can prove that he in his quaestorship embezzled the public money which was given to Cnaeus Carbo the consul; men whom we can persuade that he got money under false pretences from the quaestors of the city, as you have learnt in my former pleadings.
There will be some men, too, who will blame his boldness in having released some of the contractors from supplying the corn due to the public, when they could make it for his own interest.
There will even, perhaps, be some men who will think that robbery of his most especially to be punished, when he did not hesitate to carry off out of the most holy temples and out of the cities of our allies and friends, the monuments of Marcus Marcellus and of Publius Africanus, which in name indeed belonged to them, but in reality both belonged and were always considered to belong to the Roman people.
Suppose he has escaped from the court about peculation.
Let him think of the generals of the enemy, for whose release he has accepted bribes; let him consider what answer he can make about those men whom he has left in his own house to substitute in their places; let him consider not only how he can get over our accusation, but also how he can remedy his own confession.
Let him recollect that, in the former pleadings, being excited by the adverse and hostile shouts of the Roman people, he confessed that he had not caused the leaders of the pirates to be executed; and that he was afraid even then that it would be imputed to him that he had released them for money.
Let him confess that, which cannot be denied, that he, as a private individual, kept the leaders of the pirates alive and unhurt in his own house, after he had returned to Rome, as long as he could do so for me.
If in the case of such a prosecution for treason it was lawful for him to do so, I will admit that it was proper.
Suppose he escapes from this accusation also;
I will proceed to that point to which the Roman people has long been inviting me.
For it thinks that the decision concerning the rights to freedom and to citizenship belong to itself; and it thinks rightly.
Let that fellow, forsooth, break down with his evidence the intentions of the senators let him force his way through the questions of all men let him make his escape from your severity;
believe me, he will be held by much tighter chains in the hands of the Roman people.
The Roman people will give credit to those Roman knights who, when they were produced as witnesses before you originally, said that a Roman citizen, one who was offering honourable men as his bail, was crucified by him in their sight.
The whole of the thirty-five tribes will believe a most honourable and accomplished man, Marcus Annius, who said, that when he was present, a Roman citizen perished by the hand of the executioner.
That most admirable man Lucius Flavius, a Roman knight, will be listened to by the Roman people, who gave in evidence that his intimate friend Herennius, a merchant from Africa, though more than a hundred Roman citizens at Syracuse knew him, and defended him in tears, was put to death by the executioner.
Lucius Suetius, a man endowed with every accomplishment, speaks to them with an honesty and authority and conscientious veracity which they must trust; and he said on his oath before you that many Roman citizens had been most cruelly put to death, with every circumstance of violence, in his stone-quarries.
When I am conducting this cause for the sake of the Roman people from this rostrum, I have no fear that either any violence can be able to save him from the votes of the Roman people, or that any labour undertaken by me in my aedileship can be considered more honourable or more acceptable by the Roman people.
Let, therefore, every one at this trial attempt everything. There is no mistake now which any one can make in this cause, O judges, which will not be made at your risk.
My own line of conduct, as it is already known to you in what is past, is also provided for, and resolved on, in what is to come.
I displayed my zeal for the republic at that time, when, after a long interval, I reintroduced the old custom, and at the request of the allies and friends of the Roman people, who were, however, my own most intimate connections, prosecuted a most audacious man.
And this action of mine most virtuous and accomplished men (in which number many of you were) approved of to such a degree, that they refused the man who had been his quaestor, and who, having been offended by him, wished to prosecute his own quarrel against him, leave not only to prosecute the man himself, but even back the accusation against him, when he himself begged to do so.
I went into Sicily for the sake of inquiring into the business,
in which occupation the celerity of my return showed my industry; the multitude of documents and witnesses which I brought with me declared my diligence; and I further showed my moderation and scrupulousness, in that when I had arrived as a senator among the allies of the Roman people, having been quaestor in that province, I, though the defender of the common cause of them all, lodged rather with my own hereditary friends and connections, than those who had sought that assistance from me.
My arrival was no trouble nor expense to any one, either publicly or privately. I used in the inquiry just as much power as the law gave me, not as much as I might have had through the zeal of those men whom that fellow had oppressed.
When I returned to Rome from Sicily, when he and his friends, luxurious and polite men, had disseminated reports of this sort, in order to blunt the inclinations of the witnesses, such as that I had been seduced by a great bribe from proceeding with a genuine prosecution;
although it did not seem probable to any one, because the witnesses from Sicily were men who had known me as a quaestor in the province; and as the witnesses from Rome were men of the highest character, who knew every one of us thoroughly, just as they themselves are known;
still I had some apprehension lest any one should have a doubt of my good faith and integrity, till we came to striking out the objectionable judges.
I knew that in selecting the judges, some men, even within my own recollection, had not avoided the suspicion of a good understanding with the opposite party, though their industry and diligence was being proved actually in the prosecution of them.
I objected to objectionable judges in such a way that this is plain, that since the republic has had that constitution which we now enjoy, no tribunal has ever existed of similar renown and dignity.
And this credit that fellow says that he shares in common with me; since when he rejected Publius Galba as judge, he retained Marcus Lucretius; and when, upon this, his patron asked him why he had allowed his most intimate friends Sextus Paeduceus, Quintus Considius, and Quintus Junius, to be objected to, he answered, because he knew them to be too much attached to their own ideas and opinions in coming to a decision.
And so when the business of objecting to the judges was over, I hoped that you and I had now one common task before us.
I thought that my good faith and diligence was approved of, not only by those to whom I was known, but even by strangers.
And I was not mistaken: for in the comitia for my election, when that man was employing boundless bribery against me, the Roman people decided that his money, which had no influence with me when put in opposition to my own good faith, ought to have no influence with them to rob me of my honour.
On the day when you first, O judges, were summoned to this place, and sat in judgment on this criminal, who was so hostile to your order, who was so desirous of a new constitution, of a new tribunal and new judges, as not to be moved at the sight of you and of your assembled body?
When on the trial your dignity procured me the fruit of my diligence, I gained thus much, that in the same hour that I began to speak, I cut off from that audacious, wealthy, extravagant, and abandoned criminal, all hope of corrupting the judges;
that on the very first day, when such a number of witnesses had been brought forward, the Roman people determined that If he were acquitted, the republic would no longer exist; that the second day took away from his friends, not only all hope of victory, but even all inclination to make any defence;
that the third day prostrated the man so entirely, that, pretending to be sick, he took counsel, not what reply he could make, but how he could avoid making any;
and after that, on the subsequent days, he was so oppressed and overwhelmed by these accusations, by these witnesses, both from the city and from the provinces, that when these days of the games intervened, no one thought that he had procured an adjournment, but they thought that he was condemned.
 So that, as far as I am concerned, O judges, I gained the day; for I did not desire the spoils of Caius Verres, but the good opinion of the Roman people.
It was my business to act as accuser only if I had a good cause.
What cause was ever juster than the being appointed and selected by as illustrious a province as its defender?
To consult the welfare of the republic; what could be more honourable for the republic, than while the tribunals were in such general discredit, to bring before them a man by whose condemnation the whole order of the senate might be restored to credit and favour with the Roman people?
to prove and convince men that it was a guilty man who was brought to trial?
Who is there of the Roman people who did not carry away this conviction from the previous pleading, that if all the wickednesses, thefts, and enormities of all who have ever been condemned before were brought together into one place, they could scarcely be likened or compared to but a small part of this man's crimes?
Judges, consider and deliberate what becomes your fame, your reputation, and the common safety?
Your eminence prevents your being able to make any mistake without the greatest injury and danger to the republic.
For the Roman people cannot hope that there are any other men in the senate who can judge uprightly, if you cannot. It is inevitable that, when it has learnt to despair of the whole order, it should look for another class of men and another system of judicial proceedings.
If this seems to you at all a trifling matter, because you think the being judges a grave and inconvenient burden, you ought to be aware, in the first place, that it makes a difference whether you throw off that burden yourselves, of your own accord, or whether the power of sitting as judges is taken away from you because you have been unable to convince the Roman people of your good faith and scrupulous honesty.
In the second place, consider this also, with what great danger we shall come before those judges whom the Roman people, by reason of its hatred to you, has willed shall judge concerning you.
But I will tell you, O judges, what I am sure of.
Know, then, that there are some men who are possessed with such a hatred or your order, that they now make a practice of openly saying that they are willing for that man, whom they know to be a most infamous one, to be acquitted for this one reason, that then the honour or the judgment-seat may be taken from the senate with ignominy and disgrace.
It is not my fear for your good faith, O judges, which has urged me to lay these considerations before you at some length, but the new hopes which those men are entertaining; for when those hopes had brought Verres suddenly back from the gates of the city to this court, some men suspected that his intention had not been changed so suddenly without a cause.
 Now, in order that Hortensius may not be able to employ any new sort of complaint, and to say that a defendant is oppressed if the accuser says nothing about him; that nothing is so dangerous to the fortunes of an innocent man as for his adversaries to keep silence;
and in order that he may not praise my abilities in a way which I do not like, when he says that, if I had said much, I should have relieved him against whom I was speaking, and that I have undone him because I said nothing,
I will comply with his wishes, I shall employ one long unbroken speech: not because it is necessary, but that I may try whether he will be most vexed at my having been silent then or at my speaking now.
Here you, perhaps, will take care that I do not remit one hour of the time allowed me by law.
If I do not employ the whole time which is allowed me by law, you will complain; you will invoke the faith of gods and men, calling them to witness how Caius Verres is circumvented because the prosecutor will not speak as long as he is allowed to speak by the law.
What the law gives me for my own sake, may I not be allowed to forbear using?
For the time for stating the accusation is given me for my own sake, that I may be able to unfold my charges and the whole cause in my speech.
If I do not use it all, I do you no injury, but I give up something of my own right and advantage.
You injure me, says he, for the cause ought to be thoroughly investigated.
Certainly, for otherwise a defendant cannot be condemned, however guilty he may be. Were you, then, indignant that anything should be done by me to make it less easy for him to be condemned?
For if the cause be understood, many men may be acquitted; if it be not understood, no one can be condemned.
I injure him, it seems, for I take away the right of adjournment.
The most vexatious thing that the law has in it, the allowing a cause to be twice pleaded, has either been instituted for my sake rather than for yours, or, at all events, not more for your sake than for mine.
For if to speak twice be an advantage, certainly it is an advantage which is common to both If there is a necessity that he who has spoken last should be refuted, then it is for the sake of the prosecutor that the he has been established that there should be a second discussion.
But, as I imagine, Glaucia first proposed the law that the defendant might have an adjournment; before that time the decision might either be given at once, or the judges might take time to consider.
Which law, then, do you think the mildest?
I think that ancient one, by which a man might either be acquitted quickly, or condemned after deliberation.
I restore you that law of Acilius, according to which many men who have only been accused once, whose cause has only been pleaded once, in whose case witnesses have only been heard once, have been condemned on charges by no means so clearly proved, nor so flagitious as those on which you are convicted.
Think that you are pleading your cause, not according to that severe law, but according to that most merciful one.
I will accuse you; you shall reply. Having produced my witnesses, I will lay the whole matter before the bench in such a way, that even if the law gave them a power of adjournment, yet they shall think it discreditable to themselves not to decide at the first hearing.
But if it be necessary for the cause to be thoroughly investigated, has this one been investigated but superficially?
Are we keeping back anything, O Hortensius, a trick which we have often seen practiced in pleading?
Who ever attends much to the advocate in this sort of action, in which anything is said to have been carried off and stolen by any one?
Is not all the expectation of the judges fixed on the documents or on the witnesses?
I said in the first pleading that I would make it plain that Caius Verres had carried off four hundred thousand sesterces contrary to the law.
What ought I to have said?
Should I have pleaded more plainly if I had related the whole affair thus?
There was a certain man of Halesa, named Dio, who, when a great inheritance had come to his son from a relation while Sacerdos was praetor, had at the time no trouble nor dispute about it.
Verres, as soon as he arrived in the province, immediately wrote letters from Messana; he summoned Dio before him, he procured false witnesses from among his own friends to say that that inheritance had been forfeited to Venus Erycina.
He announced that he himself would take cognisance of that matter.
I can detail to you the whole affair in regular order, and at last tell you what the result was, namely, that Dio paid a million of sesterces, in order to prevail in a cause of most undeniable justice, besides that Verres had his herds of mares driven away, and all his plate and embroidered vestments carried off.
But neither while I was so relating these things, nor while you were denying them, would our speeches be of any great importance.
At what time then would the judge prick up his ears and begin to strain his attention?
When Dio himself came forward, and the others who had at that time been engaged in Sicily on Dio's business, when, at the very time when Dio was pleading his cause, he was proved to have borrowed money, to have galled in all that was owing to him, to have sold farms;
when the accounts of respectable men were produced, when they who had supplied Dio with money said that they had heard at the time that the money was taken on purpose to be given to Verres; when the friends, and connections, and patrons of Dio, most honourable men, said that they had heard the same thing.
Then, when this was going on, you would, I suppose, attend as you did attend. Then the cause would seem to be going on.
Everything was managed by me in the former pleading so that among all the charges there was not one in which any one of you desired an uninterrupted statement of the case.
I deny that anything was said by the witnesses which was either obscure to any one of you, or which required the eloquence of any orator to set it off.
In truth, you must recollect that I conducted the case in this way; I set forth and detailed the whole charge at the time of the examination of witnesses, so that as soon as I had explained the whole affair, I then immediately examined the witnesses.
And by that means, not only you, who have to judge, are in possession of our charges, but also the Roman people became acquainted with the whole accusation and the whole cause: although I am speaking of my own conduct as if I had done so of my own will rather than because I was induced to do so by any injustice of yours.
But you interposed another accuser, who, when I had only demanded a hundred and ten days to prosecute my inquiries in Sicily, demanded a hundred and eight for himself to go for a similar purpose into Achaia.
When you had deprived me of the three months most suitable for conducting my cause, you thought that I would give you up the remainder of the year, so that, when he had employed the time allowed to me, you, O Hortensius, after the interruption of two festivals, might make your reply forty days afterwards; and then, that the time might be so spun out, that we might come from Marius Glabrio, the praetor, and from the greater part of these judges, to another praetor, and other judges.
If I had not seen this if every one, both acquaintances and strangers, had not warned me that the object which they were driving at, which they were contriving, for which they were striving, was to cause the matter to be delayed to that time
I suppose, if I had chosen to spend all the time allowed me in stating the accusation, I should be under apprehensions that I should not have charges enough to bring, that subjects for a speech would be wanting to me, that my voice and strength would fail me, that I should not be able to accuse twice a man whom no one had dared to defend at the first pleading of the cause.
I made my conduct appear reasonable both to the judges and also to the Roman people. There is no one who thinks that their injustice and impudence could have been opposed by any other means.
Indeed, how great would have been my folly, if, though I might have avoided it, I had allowed matters to come on on the day which they who had undertaken to deliver him from justice provided for in their undertaking, when they gave their undertaking to deliver him in these words "If the trial took place on or after the first of January?"
Now I must provide for the careful management of the time which is allowed me for making a speech, since I am determined to state the whole case most fully.
Therefore I will pass by that first act of his life, most infamous and most wicked as it was.
He shall hear nothing from me of the vices and offences of his childhood, nothing about his most dissolute youth: how that youth was spent, you either remember, or else you can recognise it in the son whom he has brought up to be so like himself:
I will pass over everything which appears shameful to be mentioned; and I will consider not only what that fellow ought to have said of himself, but also what it becomes me to say.
Do you, I entreat you, permit this, and grant to my modesty, that it may be allowed to pass over in silence some portion of his shamelessness.
At that time which passed before he came into office and became a public character, he may have free and untouched as far as I am concerned.
Nothing shall be said of his drunken nocturnal revels; no mention shall be made of his pimps, and dicers, and panders; his losses at play, and the licentious transactions which the estate of his father and his own age prompted him to shall be passed over in silence.
He may have lived in all infamy at that time with impunity, as far as I am concerned; the rest of his life has been such that I can well afford to put up with the loss of not mentioning those enormities.
You were quaestors to Cnaeus Papirius the consul fourteen years ago.
All that you have done from that day to this day I bring before the court.
Not one hour will be found free from theft, from wickedness, from cruelty, from atrocity.
These years have been passed by you in the quaestorship, and in the lieutenancy in Asia, and in the city praetorship, and in the Sicilian praetorship.
On which account a division of my whole action will also be made into four parts.
As quaestor you received our province by lot, according to the decree of the senate.
A consular province fell to your lot, so that you were with Cnaeus Carbo, the consul, and had that province.
There was at that time dissension among the citizens: and in that I am not going to say anything as to what part you ought to have taken. This only do I say, that at such a time as that you ought to have made up your mind which side you would take and which party you would espouse.
Carbo was very indignant that there had fallen to his lot as his quaestor a man of such notorious luxury and indolence. But he loaded him with all sorts of kindnesses.
Not to dwell too long on this; money was voted, was paid; he went as quaestor to the province; he came into Gaul, where he had been for some time expected, to the army of the consul with the money.
At the very first opportunity that offered, (take notice of the principle on which the man discharged the duties of his offices, and administered the affairs of the republic,) the quaestor, having embezzled the public money, deserted the consul, the army, and his allotted province.
I see what I have done; he rouses himself up; he hopes that, in the instance of this charge, some breeze may be wafted this way of good will and approbation for those men to him the name of Cnaeus Carbo, though dead, is unwelcome, and to whom he hopes that that desertion and betrayal of his consul will prove acceptable.
As if he had done it from any desire to take the part of the nobility, or from any party zeal, and had not rather openly pillaged the consul, the army and the province, and then, because of this most impudent theft, had run away.
For such an action as that is obscure, and such that one may suspect that Caius Verres, because he could not bear new men, passed over to the nobility, that is, to his own party, and that he did nothing from consideration of money.
Let us see how he gave in his accounts; now he himself will show why he left Cnaeus Carbo; now he himself will show what he is.
First of all take notice of their brevity "I received," says he, "two million two hundred and thirty-five thousand four hundred and seventeen sesterces; I spent, for pay to the soldiers, for corn, for the lieutenants, for the pro-quaestor, for the praetorian cohort, sixteen hundred and thirty-five thousand four hundred and seventeen sesterces; I left at Ariminum six hundred thousand sesterces. "
Is this giving in accounts?
Did either I, or you, O Hortensius, or any man ever give in his accounts in this manner?
What does this mean?
what impudence it is!
what audacity!
What precedent is there of any such in all the number of accounts that have ever been rendered by public officers?
And yet these six hundred thousand sesterces, as to which he could not even devise a false account of whom he had paid them to, and which he said he had left at Ariminum, these six hundred thousand sesterces which he had in hand, Carbo never touched, Sulla never saved them, nor were these ever brought into the treasury.
He selected Ariminum as the town, because at the time when he was giving in his accounts, it had been taken and plundered. He did not suspect, what he shall now find out, that plenty of the Ariminians were left to us after that disaster as witnesses to that point.
Read now
Accounts rendered to Publius Lentulus, and Lucius Triarius, quaestors of the city. "
Read on
"According to the decree of the senate."
In order to be allowed to give in accounts in such a manner as this, he became one of Sulla's party in an instant, and not for the sake of contributing to the restoration of honour and dignity to the nobility.
Even if you had deserted empty-handed, still your desertion would be decided to be wicked, your betrayal of your consul, infamous.
Oh, Cnaeus Carbo was a bad citizen, a scandalous consul, a seditious man.
He may have been so to others: when did he begin to be so to you?
After he entrusted to you the money, the supplying of corn, all his accounts, and his army;
for if he had displeased you before that, you would have done the same as Marcus Piso did the year after.
When he had fallen by lot to Lucius Scipio, as consul, he never touched the money, he never joined the army at all.
The opinions he embraced concerning the republic he embraced so as to do no violence to his own good faith, to the customs of our ancestors, nor to the obligations imposed on him by the lot which he had drawn.
In truth, if we wish to disturb all these things, and to throw them into confusion, we shall render life full of danger, intrigue, and enmity; if such allurements are to have no scruples to protect them; if the connection between men in prosperous and doubtful fortunes is to cause no friendship; if the customs and principles of our ancestors are to have no authority.
He is the common enemy of all men who has once been the enemy of his own connections.
No wise man ever thought that a traitor was to be trusted;
Sulla himself, to whom the arrival of the fellow ought to have been most acceptable, removed him from himself and from his army: he ordered him to remain at Beneventum, among those men whom he believed to be exceedingly friendly to his party, where he could do no harm to his cause and could have no influence on the termination of the war.
Afterwards, indeed, he rewarded him liberally; he allowed him to seize some estates of men who had been proscribed lying in the territory of Beneventum; he loaded him with honour as a traitor; he put no confidence in him as a friend.
Now, although there are men who hate Cnaeus Carbo, though dead, yet they ought to think, not what they were glad to have happen, but what they themselves would have to fear in a similar case.
This is a misfortune common to many a cause for alarm, and a danger common to many.
There are no intrigues more difficult to guard against than those which are concealed under a pretence of duty, or under the name of some intimate connection.
For you can easily avoid one who is openly an adversary, by guarding against him; but this secret, internal, and domestic evil not only exists, but even overwhelms you before you can foresee it or examine into it.
Is it not so?
When you were sent as quaestor to the army, not only as guardian of the money, but also of the consul; when you were the sharer in all his business and of all his counsels, when you were considered by him as one of his own children, according to the tenor of the principles of our ancestors; could you on a sudden leave him? desert him? pass over to the enemy? O wickedness!
O monster to be banished to the very end of the world!
For that nature which has committed such an atrocity as this cannot be contented with this one crime alone. It must be always contriving something of this sort; it must be occupied in similar audacity and perfidy.
Therefore, that same fellow whom Cnaeus Dolabella afterwards, when Caius Malleolus had been slain, had for his quaestor, (I know not whether this connection was not even a closer one than the connection with Carbo, and whether the consideration of his having been voluntarily chosen is not stronger than that of his having been chosen by lot,) behaved to Cnaeus Dolabella in the same manner as he had behaved in to Cnaeus Carbo.
For, the charges which properly touched himself, he transferred to his shoulders; and gave information of everything connected with his cause to his enemies and accusers. He himself gave most hostile and most infamous evidence against the man to whom he had been lieutenant and pro-quaestor.
Dolabella, unfortunate as he was, through his abominable betrayal, through his infamous and false testimony, was injured far more than by either, by the odium created by that fellow's own thefts and atrocities .
What can you do with such a man? or what hope can you allow so perfidious, so ill-omened an animal to entertain?
One who despised and trampled on the lot which bound him to Cnaeus Carbo, the choice which connected him with Cnaeus Dolabella, and not only deserted them both, but also betrayed and attacked them.
Do not, I beg of you, O judges, judge of his crimes by the brevity of my speech rather than by the magnitude of the actions themselves.
For I am forced to make haste in order to have time to set before you all the things which I have resolved to relate to you.
Wherefore, now that his quaestorship has been put before you, saw that the dishonesty and wickedness of his first conduct in his first office has been thoroughly seen, listen, I pray you, to the remainder.
And in this I will pass over that period of proscription and rapine which took place under Sulla; nor will I allow him to derive any argument for his own defence from that time of common calamity to all men.
I will accuse him of nothing but his own peculiar and well-proved crimes.
Therefore, omitting all mention of the time of Sulla from the accusation, consider that splendid lieutenancy of his.
After Cilicia was appointed to Cnaeus Dolabella as his province, O ye immortal gods!
with what covetousness, with what incessant applications, did he force from him that lieutenancy for himself,
which was indeed the beginning of the greatest calamity to Dolabella.
For as he proceeded on his journey to the province, wherever he went his conduct was such, that it was not some lieutenant of the Roman people, but rather some calamity that seemed to be going through the country.
 In Achaia, (I will omit all minor things, to some of which perhaps some one else may some time or other have done something like; I will mention nothing except what is unprecedented, nothing except what would appear incredible, if it were alleged against any other criminal,) he demanded money from a Sicyonian magistrate.
Do not let this be considered a crime in Verres; others have done the tame.
When he could not give it, he punished him; a scandalous, but still not an unheard-of act.
Listen to the sort of punishment; you will ask, of what race of men you are to think him a specimen.
He ordered a fire to be made of green and damp wood in a narrow place. There he left a free man, a noble in his own country, an ally and friend of the Roman people, tortured with smoke, half dead.
After that, what statues, what paintings he carried off from Achaia, I will not mention at present. There is another part of my speech which I have reserved for speaking of this covetousness of the man.
You have heard that at Athens a great sum of money was taken out of the temple of Minerva. This was mentioned in the trial of Cnaeus Dolabella.
Mentioned?
the amount too was stated.
Of this design you will find that Caius Verres was not only a partaker, but was even the chief instigator.
He came to Delos.
There from that most holy temple of Apollo he privately took away by night the most beautiful and ancient statues, and took care that they were all placed on board his own transport.
The next day, when the inhabitants of Delos saw their temple plundered, they were very indignant. For the holiness and antiquity of that temple is so great in their eyes, that they believe that Apollo himself was born in that place.
However, they did not dare to say one word about it, lest haply Dolabella himself might be concerned in the business. Then on a sudden a very great tempest arose, O judges; so that Dolabella could not only not depart, when he wished, but could scarcely stand in the city, such vast waves were dashed on shore.
Here that ship of that pirate loaded with the consecrated statues, being cast up and driven ashore by the waves, is broken to pieces.
Those statues of Apollo were found on the shore;
by command of Dolabella they are restored; the tempest is lulled; Dolabella departs from Delos.
I do not doubt, though there was no feeling of humanity ever in you, no regard for holiness, still that now in your fear and danger thoughts of your wicked actions occurred to you.
Can there be any comfortable hope of safety cherished by you, when you recollect how impious, how wicked, how blasphemous has been your conduct towards the immortal gods?
Did you dare to plunder the Delian Apollo?
Did you dare to lay impious and sacrilegious hands on that temple, so ancient, so venerated, so holy?
If you were not in your childhood taught and framed to learn and know what has been committed to writing, still would you not afterwards, when you came into the very places themselves, learn and believe what is handed down both by tradition and by documents:
That Latona, after a long wandering and persecution, pregnant, and now near bringing forth, when her time was come, fled to Delos, and there brought forth Apollo and Diana;
from which belief of men that island is considered sacred to those gods; and such is and always has been the influence of that religious belief, that not even the Persians, when they waged war on all Greece, on gods and men, and when they had put in with a fleet of a thousand ships at Delos, attempted to violate, or even to touch anything.
Did you, O most wicked, O most insane of men, attempt to plunder this temple?
Was any covetousness of such power as to extinguish such solemn religious belief?
And if you did not think of this at that time, do you not recollect even now that there is no evil so great as not to have been long since due to you for your wicked actions?
But after he arrived in Asia, why should I enumerate the dinners, the suppers, the horses, and the presents which marked that progress?
I am not going to say anything against Verres for everyday crimes. I say that he carried off by force some most beautiful statues from Chios; also from Erythrae; also from Halicarnassus.
From Tenedos (I pass over the money which he seized) he carried off Tenes himself, who among the Tenedians is considered a most holy god, who is said to have founded that city, after whose name it is called Tenedos.
This very Tenes, I say, most admirably wrought, which you have seen before now in the assembly, he carried off amid the great lamentations of the city. But that storming of that most ancient and most noble temple of the Samian Juno, how grievous was it to the Samians! how bitter to all Asia! how notorious to all men! how notorious to every one of you!
And when ambassadors had come from Samos into Asia to Caius Nero, to complain of this attack on that temple, they received for answer, that complaints of that sort, which concerned a lieutenant of the Roman people, ought not to be brought before the praetor, but must be carried to Rome.
What pictures did he carry off from thence; what statues!
which I saw lately in his house, when I went thither for the sake of sealing it up.
And where are those statues now, O Verres?
I mean those which I lately saw in your house against every pillar, and also in every space between two pillars, and actually arranged in the grove in the open air?
Why were those things left at your house, as long as you thought that another praetor, with the other judges whom you expected to have substituted in the room of these, was to sit in judgment upon your? But when you saw that we preferred suiting the convenience of our own witnesses rather than your convenience as to time, you left not one statue in your house except two which were in the middle of it, and which were themselves stolen from Samos.
Did you not think that I would summon your most intimate friends to give evidence of this matter, who had often been at your house, and ask of them whether they knew that statues were there which were not?
What did you think that these men would think of you then, when they saw that you were no longer contending against your accuser, but against the quaestor and the brokers?
On which matter you heard Charidemus of Chios give his evidence at the former pleadings, that he, when he was captain of a trireme, and was attending Verres on his departure from Asia, was with him at Samos, by command of Dolabella and that he then knew that the temple of Juno had been plundered, and the town of Samos;
that afterwards he had been put on his trial before the Chians, his fellow citizens, on the accusation of the Samians; and that he had been acquitted because he had made it plain that the allegations of the Samians concerned Verres, and not him.
You know that Aspendus is an ancient and noble town in Pamphylia, full of very fine statues.
I do not say that one statue or another was taken away from thence: this I say, that you, O Verres, left not one statue at Aspendus; that everything from the temples and from all public places was openly seized and carried away on wagons, the citizens all looking on.
And he even carried off that harp-player of Aspendus, of whom you have often heard the saying, which is a proverb among the Greeks, who used to say that he could sing everything within himself, and put him in the inmost part of his own house, so as to appear to have surpassed the statue itself in trickery.
At Perga we are aware that there is a very ancient and very holy temple of Diana. That too, I say, was stripped and plundered by you; and all the gold which there was on Diana herself was taken off and carried away.
What, in the name of mischief, can such audacity and inanity mean?
In the very cities of our friends and allies, which you visited under the pretext of your office as lieutenant, if you had stormed them by force with an army, and had exercised military rule there; still, I think, the statues and ornaments which you took away, you would have carried, not to your own house, nor to the suburban villas of your friends, but to Rome for the public use.
Why should I speak of Marcus Marcellus, who took Syracuse, that most beautiful city?
why of Lucius Scipio, who waged war in Asia, and conquered Antiochus, a most powerful monarch?
why of Flaminius, who subdued Philip the king, and Macedonia?
why of Lucius Paullus, who with his might and valour conquered king Perses?
why of Lucius Mummius, who overthrew that most beautiful and elegant city Corinth, full of all sorts of riches, and brought many cities of Achaia and Boeotia under the empire and dominion of the Roman people?
their houses, though they were rich in virtue and honour, were empty of statues and paintings.
But we see the whole city, the temples of the gods, and all parts of Italy, adorned with their gifts, and with memorials of them. I am afraid all this may seem to some people too ancient, and long ago obsolete.
For at that time all men were so uniformly disposed in the same manner, that this credit of eminent virtue and incorruptibility appears to belong, not only to those men, but also to those times.
Publius Servilius, a most illustrious man, who has performed the noblest exploits, is present. He will deliver his opinion on your conduct.
He, by his power, had forces; his wisdom and his valour took Olympus, an ancient city, and one strengthened and embellished in every possible manner.
I am bringing forward recent example of a most distinguished man. For Servilius, as a general of the Roman people, took Olympus after you, as lieutenant of the quaestor in the same district, had taken care to harass and plunder all the cities of our friends and allies even when they were at peace.
The things which you carried off from the holiest temples with wickedness, and like a robber, we cannot see, except in your own houses, or in those of your friends.
The statues and decorations which Publius Servilius brought away from the cities of our enemies, taken by his courage and valour, according to the laws of war and his own rights as commander-in-chief, he brought home for the Roman people; he carried them in his triumph, and took care that a description of them should be engraved on public tablets and hid up in the treasury.
You may learn from public documents the industry of that most honourable man.
Read "
The accounts delivered by Publius Servilius.
" You see not only the number of the statues, but the size, the figure, and the condition of each one among them accurately described in writing."
Certainly, the delight arising from virtue and from victory is much greater than that pleasure which is derived from licentiousness and covetousness.
I say that Servilius took much more care to have the booty of the Roman people noted and described, than you took to have your plunder catalogued.
You will say that your statues and paintings were also an ornament to the city and forum of the Roman people.
I recollect: I, together with the Roman people, saw the forum and place for holding the assemblies adorned with embellishments, in appearance indeed magnificent, but to one's senses and thoughts bitter and melancholy.
I saw everything glittering with your thefts, with the plunder of the provinces, with the spoils of our allies and friends.
At which time, O judges, that fellow conceived the hope of committing his other crimes. For he saw that these men, who wished to be called the masters of the courts of law, were slaves to these desires.
But the allies and foreign nations then first abandoned the hope of saving any of their property and fortunes, because, as it happened, there were at that time very many ambassadors from Asia and Achaia at Rome, who worshipped in the forum the images of the gods which had been taken from their temples. And so also, when they recognised the other statues and ornaments, they wept, as they beheld the different pieces of their property in different place.
And from all those men we then used to hear discourses of this sort: "That it was impossible for any one to doubt of the ruin of our allies and friends, when men saw in the forum of the Roman people, in which formerly those men used to be accused and condemned who had done any injury to the allies, those things now openly placed which had been wickedly seized and taken away from the allies. "
Here I do not expect that he will deny that he has many statues, and countless paintings.
But, as I fancy, he is accustomed at times to say that he purchased these things which he seized and stole; since indeed he was sent at the public expense, and with the title of ambassador, into Achaia, Asia, and Pamphylia as a purchaser of statues and paintings. I have all the accounts both of that fellow and of his father, of money received, which I have most carefully read and arranged; those of your father, as long as he lived, you own, as far as you say that you have made them up.
For in that man, O judges, you will find this new thing.
We hear that some men have never kept accounts; which is a mistaken opinion of men with respect to Antonius; for he kept them most carefully. But there may be men of that sort, but they are by no means to be approved of.
We hear that some men have not kept them from the beginning, but after some time have made them up; there is a way of accounting for this too.
But this is unprecedented and absurd which this man gave us for an answer, when we demanded his account of him: "That he kept them up to the consulship of Marcus Terentius and Caius Cassius; but that, after that, he gave up keeping them. "
In another place we will consider what sort of a reply this is; at present I am not concerned with it; for of the times about which I am at present occupied I have the accounts, both yours and those of your father.
You cannot deny that you carried off very many most beautiful statues, very many admirable paintings.
I wish you would deny it.
Show in your accounts or in those of your father that any one of them was purchased, and you have gained your cause.
There is not even any possibility of your having bought those two most beautiful statues which are now standing in your court, and which stood for many years by the folding doors of the Samian Juno; these two, I say, which are now the only statues left in your house, which are waiting for the broker, left alone and deserted by the other statues.
But, I suppose in these matters alone had he this irrepressible and unbridled covetousness; his other desires were restrained by some reason and moderation.
To how many noble virgins, to how many matrons do you think he offered violence in that foul and obscene lieutenancy?
In what town did he set his foot that he did not leave more traces of his rapes and atrocities than he did of his arrival?
But I will pass over everything which can be denied; even those things which are most certain and most evident I will omit; I will select one of his abominable deeds, in order that I may the more easily at last arrive at Sicily, which has imposed the burden of this business on me.
There is a town on the Hellespont, O judges, called Lampsacus, among the first in the province of Asia for renown and for nobleness. And the citizens themselves of Lampsacus are most especially kind to all Roman citizens, and also are an especially quiet and orderly race; almost beyond all the rest of the Greeks inclined to the most perfect ease, rather than to any disorder or tumult.
It happened, when he had prevailed on Cnaeus Dolabella to send him to king Nicomedes and to king Sadala, and when he had begged this expedition, more with a view to his own gain than to any advantage for the republic, that in that journey he came to Lampsacus, to the great misfortune and almost ruin of the city.
He is conducted to the house of a man named Janitor as his host; and his companions also, are billeted on other entertainers.
As was the fellow's custom, and as his lusts always instigating him to commit some wickedness prompted him, he immediately gives a commission to his companions, the most worthless and infamous of men, to inquire and find out whether there is any virgin woman worthy of his staying longer at Lampsacus for her sake.
He had a companion of the name of Rubrius, a man made for such vices as his, who used to find out all these things for him wherever he went, with wonderful address.
He brings him the following news, that there was a man of the name of Philodamus, in birth, in rank, in wealth, and in reputation by far the first man among the citizens of Lampsacus; that his daughter, who was living with her father because she had not yet got a husband, was a woman of extraordinary beauty, but was also considered exceedingly modest and virtuous.
The fellow, when he heard this, was so inflamed with desire for that which he had not only not seen himself, but which even he from whom he heard of it had not seen himself, that he said he should like to go to Philodamus immediately.
Janitor, his host, who suspected nothing, being afraid that he must have given him some offence himself, endeavoured with all his might to detain him.
This man, as he could not find any pretext for leaving his host's house began to pave his way for his meditated violence by other steps.
He says that Rubrius, his most loved friend, his assistant in all such matters, and the partner of his counsels, is lodged with but little comfort. He orders him to be conducted to the house of Philodamus.
But when this is reported to Philodamus, although he was ignorant what great misfortune was at that moment being contrived for him and for his children, still he comes to him, represents to him that that is not his office, that when it was his turn to receive guests, he was accustomed to receive the praetors and consuls themselves, and not the attendants of lieutenants.
This man, as he was hurried on by that one desire alone, disregarded all his demands and allegations, and ordered Rubrius to be introduced by force into the house of a man who had a right to refuse him admittance. On this, Philodamus, when he could not preserve his rights, studied at least to preserve his courtesy and affability.
He who had always been considered most hospitable and most friendly towards our people, did not like to appear to have received even this fellow Rubrius into his house unwillingly;
he prepares a banquet magnificently and luxuriously, being, as he was, among the richest of all his fellow citizens; he begs Rubrius to invite whoever were agreeable to himself; to leave, if he pleased, just room for himself alone. He even sends his own son, a most excellent youth, out to one of his relations to supper.
Rubrius invites Verres's companions; Verres informs them all what there was to be done.
They come early. They sit down to supper.
Conversation takes place among them, and an invitation is given to drink in the Greek fashion. The host encourages them; they demand wine in larger goblets; the banquet proceeds with the conversation and joy of every one.
When the business appeared to Rubrius to have got warm enough, "I would know of you, O Philodamus," says he, "why you do not bid your daughter to be invited in hither to us?"
The man, who was both a most dignified man, and of mature age, and a parent, was amazed at the speech of the rascal.
Rubrius began to urge it.
Then he, in order to give some answer, said that it was not the custom of the Greeks for women to sit down at the banquets of men.
On this some one else from some other part of the room cried out, But this is not to be borne; let the women be summoned.
And immediately Rubrius orders his slaves to shut the door, and to stand at the doors themselves.
But when that man perceived that what was intended and being prepared was, that violence should be offered to his daughter, he calls his servants to him, he bids them disregard him and defend his daughter, and orders some one to run out and bear the news to his son of this overpowering domestic misfortune.
At last Philodamus has a quantity of boiling water thrown over him by Rubrius himself.
When the news of this is brought to the son, half dead with alarm he instantly hastens home to bring aid to save the life of his father and the modesty of his sister.
All the citizens of Lampsacus, with the same spirit, the moment they heard of it, because both the worth of Philodamus and the enormity of the injury excited them, assembled by night at his house.
At this time Cornelius, the lictor of him, who had been placed with his slaves by Rubrius, as if on guard, for the purpose of carrying off the woman, is slain; some of the slaves are wounded; Rubrius himself is wounded in the crowd.
That man, when he saw such an uproar excited by his own cupidity, began to wish to escape some way or other if he could.
 The next morning men come early to the public assembly; they ask what is best to be done; every one delivered his own opinions to the people according as each individual had the most weight.
No one was found whose opinion and speech was not to this purpose: "That it need not be feared, if the Lampsacenes had avenged that man's atrocious wickedness by force and by the sword, that the senate and Roman people would have thought they ought to chastise their city.
And if the lieutenants of the Roman people were to establish this law with respect to the allies, and to foreign nations, that they were not to be allowed to preserve the chastity of their children unpolluted by their lusts, it was better to endure anything rather than to live in a state of such violence and bitterness.
As all were of this opinion, and as every one spoke in this tenor, as his own feelings and indignation prompted each individual, all immediately proceeded towards the house where Verres was staying.
They began to beat the door with stones, to attack it with weapons, to surround it with wood and faggots, and to apply fire to it.
Then the Roman citizens who were dwelling as traders at Lampsacus run together to the spot;
they entreat the citizens of Lampsacus to allow the name of the lieutenancy to have more weight with them than the insult of the lieutenant; they say that they were well aware that he was an infamous and wicked man, but as he had not accomplished what he had attempted, and as he was not going to be at Lampsacus any longer, their error in sparing a wicked man would be less than that of not sparing a lieutenant.
And so that fellow, far more wicked and infamous than even the notorious Hadrian, was a good deal more fortunate.
He, because Roman citizens could not tolerate his avarice, was burnt alive at Utica in his own house; and that was thought to have happened to him so deservedly, that all men rejoiced, and no punishment was inflicted for the deed. This man, scorched indeed though he was by the fire made by our allies, yet escaped from those flames and that danger; and has not even yet been able to imagine what he had done, or what had happened to bring him into such great danger.
For he cannot say: "When I was trying to put down a sedition, when I was ordering corn, when I was collecting money for the soldiers, when in short I was doing something or other for the sake of the republic, because I gave some strict order, because I punished some one, because I threatened some one, all this happened. "
Even if he were to say so, still he ought not to be pardoned, if he seemed to have been brought into such great danger through issuing too savage commands to our allies.
 Now when he neither dares himself to allege any such cause for the tumult as being true, nor even to invent such a falsehood,
but when a most temperate man of his own order, who at that time was in attendance on Caius Nero, Publius Tettius, says that he too heard this same account at Lampsacus, (a man most accomplished in everything, Caius Varro, who was at that time in Asia as military tribune, says that be heard this very same story from Philodamus,) can you doubt that fortune was willing, not so much to save him from that danger, as to reserve him for your judgment!
Unless, indeed, he will say, as indeed Hortensius did say, interrupting Tettius while he was giving his evidence in the former pleading (at which time indeed he gave plenty of proof that, if there were anything which he could say, he could not keep silence; so that we may all feel sure that, while he was silent in the other matters that were alleged, he was so because he had nothing to say); he at that time said this, that Philodamus and his son had been condemned by Caius Nero.
About which, not to make a long speech, I will merely say that Nero and his bench of judges came to that decision on the ground that it was plain that Cornelius, his lictor, had been slain, and that they thought it was not right that any one, even while avenging his own injuries, should have the power to kill a man.
And as to this I see that you were not by Nero's sentence acquitted of atrocity, but that they were convicted of murder.
And yet what sort of a conviction was that?
Listen, I entreat you, O judges, and do sometimes pity our allies, and show that they ought to have, and that they have, some protection in your integrity.
Because the man appeared to all Asia to have been lawfully slain, being in name indeed his lictor, but in reality the minister of his most profligate desires, Verres feared that Philodamus would be acquitted by the sentence of Nero.
He begs and entreats Dolabella to leave his own province, to go to Nero; he shows that he himself cannot be safe if Philodamus be allowed to live and at any time to come to Rome.
Dolabella was moved; he did what many blamed, in leaving his army, his province, and the war, and in going into Asia, into the province of another magistrate, for the sake of a most worthless man.
After he came to Nero, he urged him to take cognisance of the cause of Philodamus.
He came himself to sit on the bench, and to be the first to deliver his opinion.
He had brought with him also his prefects, and his military tribunes, all of whom Nero invited to take their places on the bench On that bench also was that most just judge Verres himself.
There were some Romans also, creditors of some of the Greeks, to whom the favour of any lieutenant, be he ever so infamous, is of the greatest influence in enabling them to get in their money.
The unhappy prisoner could find no one to defend him; for what citizen was there who was not under the influence of Dolabella? what Greek who was not afraid of his power and authority?
And then is assigned as the accuser a Roman citizen, one of the creditors of the Lampsacenes; and if he would only say what that fellow ordered him to say, he was to be enabled to compel payment of his money from the people, by the aid of that same Verres's lictors.
When all these thing; were conducted with such zeal, and with such resources; when many were accusing that unhappy man, and no one was defending him;
and when Dolabella, with his prefects, was taking an eager part on the bench; when Verres kept saying that his fortunes were at stake when he also gave his evidence when he also was sitting on the bench when he also had provided the accuser;
when all this was done, and when it was clear that the man had been slain, still, so great was the weight which the consideration of bat fellow's injury had, so great was his iniquity thought, that the case of Philodamus was adjourned for further inquiry.
 Why need I now speak of the energy of Cnaeus Dolabella at the second hearing of the cause, of his tears of his agitation of body and minds?
Why need I describe the mind of Caius Nero, a most virtuous and innocent man, but still on some occasions too timid and low spirited?
who in that emergency had no idea what to do, unless, perchance (as every one wished him to do), to settle the matter without the intervention of Verres and Dolabella.
Whatever had been done without their intervention all men would approve; but, as it was, the sentence which was given was thought not to have been pronounced judicially by Nero, but to have been extorted by Dolabella.
For Philodamus and his son are convicted by a few votes: Dolabella is present; urges and presses Nero to have them executed as speedily as possible, in order that as few as may be may bear of that man's nefarious wickedness.
There is exhibited in the market-place of Laodicea a spectacle bitter, and miserable, and grievous to the whole province of Asia an aged parent led forth to punishment, and on the other side a son; the one because he had defended the chastity of his children, the other because he had defended the life of his father and the fair fame of his sister.
Each was weeping, the father, not for his own execution, but for that of his son; the son for that of his father.
How many tears do you think that Nero himself sheds?
How great do you think was the weeping of all Asia?
How great the groans and lamentations of the citizens of Lampsacus, that innocent men, nobles, allies and friends of the Roman people, should be put to death by public execution, on account of the unprecedented wickedness and impious desires of one most profligate man?
After this, O Dolabella, no one can pity either you or your children, whom you have left miserable, in beggary and solitude.
Was Verres so dear to you, that you should wish the disappointment of his lust to be expiated by the blood of innocent men?
Did you leave your army and the enemy, in order by your own power and cruelty to diminish the dangers of that most wicked man?
For, had you expected him to be an everlasting friend to you, because you had appointed him to act as your quaestor?
Did you not know, that Cnaeus Carbo, the consul whose real quaestor he had been, had not only been deserted by him, but had also been deprived of his resources and his money, and nefariously attacked and betrayed by him?
Therefore, you too experienced his perfidy when he joined your enemies, when he, himself a most guilty man, gave most damaging evidence against you when he refused to give in his accounts to the treasury unless you were condemned.
Are your lusts, O Verres, to be so atrocious, that the provinces of the Roman people, that foreign nations, cannot limit and cannot endure them?
Unless whatever you see, whatever you hear, whatever you desire, whatever you think of, is in a moment to be subservient to your nod, is at once to obey your lust and desire, are men to be sent into people's houses?
are the houses to be stormed? Are cities not only the cities of enemies now reduced to peace but are the cities of our allies and friends to be forced to have recourse to violence and to arms, in order to be able to repel from themselves and from their children the wickedness and lust of a lieutenant of the Roman people?
For I ask of you, were you besieged at Lampsacus?
Did that multitude begin to burn the house in which you were staying? Did the citizens of Lampsacus wish to burn a lieutenant of the Roman people alive?
You cannot deny it; for I have your own evidence which you gave before Nero, I have the letters which you sent to him.
Recite the passage from his evidence.
Not long afterwards, they came into the house.
Was the city of Lampsacus endeavouring to make war on the Roman people?
Did it wish to revolt from our dominion to cast off the name of allies of Rome?
For I see, and, from those things which I have read and heard, I am sure, that, if in any city a lieutenant of the Roman people has been, not only besieged, not only attacked with fire and sword, by violence, and by armed forces, but even to some extent actually injured, unless satisfaction be publicly made for the insult, war is invariably declared and waged against that city.
What, then, was the cause why the whole city of the Lampsacenes ran, as you write yourself, from the assembly to your house?
For neither in the letters which you sent to Nero, nor in your evidence, do you mention any reason for so important a disturbance.
You say that you were besieged, that fire was applied to your house, that faggots were put round it; you say that your lictor was slain; you say that you did not dare appear in the public streets; but the cause of all this alarm you conceal.
For if Rubrius had done any injury to any one on his own account, and not at your instigation and for the gratification of your desires, they would rather have come to you to complain of the injury done by your companion, than have come to besiege you.
As, therefore, he himself has concealed what the cause of that disturbance was, and as the witnesses produced by us have related it, do not both their evidence and his own continued silence prove the reason to be that which we have alleged?
Will you then spare this man, O judges? whose offences are so great that they whom he injured could neither wait for the legitimate time to take their revenge, nor restrain to a future time the violence of their indignation.
You were besieged?
By whom?
By the citizens of Lampsacus
barbarous men, I suppose, or, at all events, men who despised the name of the Roman people.
Say rather, men, by nature, by custom, and by education most gentle;
moreover, by condition, allies of the Roman people, by fortune our subjects, by inclination our suppliants so that it is evident to all men, that unless the bitterness of the injury and the enormity of the wickedness had been such that the Lampsacenes thought it better to die than to endure it, they never would have advanced to such a pitch as to be more influenced by hatred of your lust than by fear of your office as lieutenant.
Do not, in the name of the immortal gods, I entreat you do not compel the allies and foreign nations to have recourse to such a refuge as that; and they must of necessity have recourse to it, unless you chastise such crimes.
Nothing would ever have softened the citizens of Lampsacus towards him, except their believing that he would be punished at Rome.
Although they had sustained such an injury that they could not sufficiently avenge it by any law in the world, yet they would have preferred to submit their griefs to our laws and tribunals, rather than to give way to their own feelings of indignation.
You, when you have been besieged by so illustrious a city on account of your own wickedness and crime when you have compelled men, miserable and maddened by calamity, as if in despair of our laws and tribunals, to fly to violence, to combat, and to arms when you have shown yourself in the towns and cities of our friends,
not as a lieutenant of the Roman people, but as a lustful and inhuman tyrant when among foreign nations you have injured the reputation of our dominion and our name by your infamy and your crimes when you have with difficulty saved yourself from the sword of the friends of the Roman people, and escaped from the fire of its allies, do you think you will find an asylum here?
You are mistaken they allowed you to escape alive that you might fall into our power here, not that you might find rest here.
 And you say that a judicial decision was come to that you were injuriously besieged for no reason at Lampsacus, because Philodamus and his son were condemned.
What if I show, if I make it evident, by the evidence of a worthless man indeed, but still a competent witness in this matter, by the evidence of you yourself, that you yourself transferred the reason of this siege laid to you, and the blame of it, to others? and that those whom you had accused were not punished?
Then the decision of Nero will do you but little good.
Recite the letters which he sent to Nero.
The letter of Caius Verres to Nero
Themistagoras and Thessalus.
" You write that Themistagoras and Thessalus stirred up the people.
What people?
They who besieged you; who endeavoured to burn you alive.
Where do you prosecute them? Where do you accuse them? Where do you defend the name and rights of a lieutenant?
Will you say that that was settled by the trial of Philodamus?
Let me have the evidence of Verres himself.
Let us see what that fellow said on his oath.
Recite it.
Being asked by the accuser, he answered that he was not prosecuting for that in this trial, that he intended to prosecute for that another time.
How, then, does Nero's decision profit you? how does the conviction of Philodamus?
Though you, a lieutenant, had been besieged, and when, as you yourself write to Nero, a notorious injury had been done to the Roman people, and to the common cause of all lieutenants, you did not prosecute.
You said that you intended to prosecute at some other time.
When was that time?
When have you prosecuted?
Why have you taken so much from the rights of a lieutenant's rank? Why have you abandoned and betrayed the cause of the Roman people? Why have you passed over your own injuries, involved as they were in the public injury?
Ought you not to have brought the cause before the senate? to have complained of such atrocious injuries?
to have taken care that those men who had excited the populace should be summoned by the letters of the consuls?
Lately, when Marcus Aurelius Scaurus made the demand, because he said that he as quaestor had been prevented by force at Ephesus from taking his servant out of the temple of Diana, who had taken refuge in that asylum, Pericles, an Ephesian, a most noble man, was summoned to Rome, because he was accused of having been the author of that wrong.
If you had stated to the senate that you, a lieutenant, had been so treated at Lampsacus, that your companions were wounded, your lictor slain, you yourself surrounded and nearly burnt, and that the ringleaders and principal actors and chiefs in that transaction were Themistagoras and Thessalus, who, you write, were so, who would not have been moved? Who would not have thought that he was taking care of himself in chastising the injury which had been done to you?
Who would not have thought that not only your cause but that the common safety was at stake in that matter?
In truth the name of lieutenant ought to be such as to pass in safety not only among the laws of allies, but even amid the arms of enemies.
This crime committed at Lampsacus is very great; a crime of lust and of the most infamous desires. Listen now to a tale of avarice, but little less iniquitous of its sort.
He demanded of the Milesians a ship to attend him to Myndus as a guard. They immediately gave him a light vessel, a beautiful one of its class, splendidly adorned and armed.
With this guard he went to Myndus.
For, as to the wool being public property which he carried off from the Milesians, as for his extravagance on his arrival, as for his insults and injuries offered to the Milesian magistrates, although they might be stated not only truly, but also with vehemence and with indignation, still I shall pass them all over, and reserve them for another time to be proved by evidence.
At present listen to this which cannot possibly be suppressed, and at the same time cannot be mentioned with proper dignity.
He orders the soldiers and the crew to return from Myndus to Miletus on foot; he himself sold that beautiful light vessel, picked out of the ten ships of the Milesians, to Lucius Magius and Lucius Rabius, who were living at Myndus.
These are the men whom the senate lately voted should be considered in the number of enemies. In this vessel they sailed to all the enemies of the Roman people, from Dianium, which is in Spain, to Senope, which is in Pontus. O ye immortal gods!
the incredible avarice, the unheard-of audacity of such a proceeding!
Did you dare to sell a ship of the Roman fleet, which the city of Miletus had assigned to you to attend upon you?
If the magnitude of the crime, if the opinion of men, had no influence on you, did this, too, never occur to you, that so illustrious and so noble a city would he a witness against you of this most wicked theft, or rather of this most abominable robbery?
Or because at that time Cnaeus Dolabella attempted, at your request, to punish the man who had been in command of that vessel, and who had reported to the Milesians what had been done, and had ordered his report, which according to their laws had been inserted in the public registers, to be erased, did you, on that account, fancy that you had escaped from that accusation? That opinion of yours has much deceived you, and on many occasions.
For you have always fancied, and especially in Sicily, that you had taken sufficient precautions for your defence, when you had either forbidden anything to be mentioned in the public records, or had compelled that which had been so mentioned to be erased.
How vain that step is, although in the former pleading you learnt it in the instance of many cities of Sicily, yet you may learn it again in the case of this city.
The citizens are, indeed, obedient to the command, as long as they are present who give the command. As soon as they are gone, they not only set down that which they have been forbidden to set down, but they also write down the reason why it was not entered in the public records at the time.
Those documents remain at Miletus, and will remain as long as that city lasts.
For the Milesian people had built ten ships by command of Lucius Marcus out of the taxes imposed by the Roman people, as the other cities of Asia had done, each in proportion to its amount of taxation.
Wherefore they entered on their public records, that one of the ten had been lost, not by the sudden attack of pirates, but by the robbery of a lieutenant, not by the violence of a storm, but by this horrible tempest which fell upon the allies.
There are at Rome Milesian ambassadors, most noble men and the chief men of the city, who, although they are waiting with apprehension for the month of February and the time of the consuls elect, yet they not only do not dare to deny such an atrocious action when they are asked about it, but they cannot forbear speaking of it unasked if they are present.
They will tell you, I say, being induced by regard to religion, and by their fear of their laws at home, what has become of that vessel. They will declare to you that Caius Verres has behaved himself like a most infamous pirate in regard to that fleet which was built against pirates.
When Caius Malleolus, the quaestor of Dolabella, had been slain, he thought that two inheritances had come to him; one, that of his quaestorian office, for he was immediately desired by Dolabella to be his proquaestor; the other, of a guardianship, for as he was appointed guardian of the young Malleolus, he immediately invaded his property.
For Malleolus had started for his province so splendidly equipped that he left actually nothing behind him at home.
Besides, he had put out a great deal of money among the provincials, and had taken bills from them.
He had taken with him a great quantity of admirably embossed silver plate. For he, too, was a companion of that fellow Verres in that disease and in that covetousness; and so he left behind him at his death a great quantity of silver plate, a great household of slaves, many workmen, many beautiful youths.
That fellow seized all the plate that took his fancy; carried off all the slaves he chose; carried off the wines and all the other things which are procured most easily in Asia, which he had left behind: the rest he sold, and took the money himself.
Though it was plain that he had received two million, five hundred thousand sesterces, when he returned to Rome, he rendered no account to his ward, none to his ward's mother, none to his fellow-guardians; though he had the servants of his ward, who were workmen, at home, and beautiful and accomplished slaves about him, he said that they were his own, that he had bought them.
When the mother and grandmother of the boy repeatedly asked him if he would neither restore the mosey nor render an account, at least to say how much money of Malleolus's he had received, being wearied with their importunities, at last he said, a million of sesterces.
Then on the last line of his accounts, he put in a name at the bottom by a most shameless erasure; he put down that he had paid to Chrysogonus, a slave, six hundred thousand sesterces which he had received for his ward Malleolus.
How out of a million they became six hundred thousand; how the six hundred thousand tallied so exactly with other accounts, that of the money belonging to Cnaeus Carbo there was also a remainder of six hundred thousand sesterces; and how it was that they were put down as paid to Chrysogonus; why that name occurred on the bottom line of the page, and after an erasure, you will judge.
Yet, though he had entered in his accounts six hundred thousand sesterces as having been received, he has never paid over fifty thousand.
Of the slaves, since he has been prosecuted in this manner, some have been restored, some are detained even now.
All the gains which they had made, and all their substitutes are detained.
This is that fellow's splendid guardianship.
See to whom you are entrusting your children! Behold how great is the recollection of a dead companion! Behold how great is the fear of the opinion of the living!
When all Asia had given herself up to you to be harassed and plundered, when all Pamphylia was placed at your mercy to be pillaged, were you not content with this rich booty?
Could you not keep your hands off your guardianship, off your ward, off the son of your comrade?
It is not now the Sicilians; they are now a set of ploughmen, as you are constantly saying, who are hemming you in.
It is not the men who have been excited against you and rendered hostile to you by your own decrees and edicts.
Malleolus is brought forward by me and his mother and his grandmother, who, unfortunate, and weeping, say that their boy has been stripped by you of his father's property.
What are you waiting for?
till poor Malleolus rises from the shades below, and demands of you an account of your discharge of the duties of a guardian, of a comrade, of an intimate friend?
Fancy that he is present himself,
O most avaricious and most licentious man, restore the property of your comrade to his son; if not all you have robbed him of, at least that which you have confessed that you received.
Why do you compel the son of your comrade to utter his first words in the forum with the voice of indignation and complaint?
Why do you compel the wife of your comrade, the mother-in-law of your comrade, in short, the whole family of your dead comrade, to hear evidence against you?
Why do you compel most modest and admirable women to come against their wont and against their will into so great an assembly of men?
Recite the evidence of them all.
The evidence of the mother and grandmother.
 But how he as proquaestor harassed the republic of the Milyades, how he oppressed Lycia, Pamphylia, Piscidia, and all Phrygia, in his levying corn from them, and valuing it according to that valuation of his which he then devised for the first time, it is not necessary for me now to relate, know this much, that these articles (and all such matters were transacted through his instrumentality, while he levied on the cities corn, hides, hair-cloth, sacks, but did not receive the goods but exacted money instead of them), for these articles alone damages were laid in the action against Dolabella, at three millions of sesterces.
And all these things even if they were done with the consent of Dolabella, were yet all accomplished through the instrumentality of that man.
I will pause on one article, for many are of the same sort.
Recite.
Money received from the actions against Cnaeus Dolabella, praetor of the Roman people, that which was received from the State of the Milyades.
I say that you collected this money, that you made this valuation, that the money was paid to you; and I prove that you went through every part of the province with the same violence and injustice, when you were collecting most enormous sums, like some disastrous tempest or pestilence.
Therefore Marcus Scaurus, who accused Cnaeus Dolabella, held him under his power and in subjection.
Being a young man, when in prosecuting his inquiries he ascertained the numerous robberies and iniquities of that man, he acted skillfully and warily.
He showed him a huge volume full of his exploits; he got from the fellow all he wanted against Dolabella.
He brought him forward as a witness; the fellow said everything which he thought the accuser wished him to say.
And of that class of witnesses, men who were accomplices in his robberies, I might have had a great plenty if I had chosen to employ them; who offered of their own accord to go wherever I chose, in order to deliver themselves from the danger of actions, and from a connection with his crimes.
I rejected the voluntary offers of all of them.
There was not only no room for a traitor, there was none even for a deserter in my camp.
Perhaps they are to be considered better accusers than I, who do all these things;
but I wish the defender of others to be praised in my person, not the accuser.
He does not dare bring in his accounts to the treasury before Dolabella is condemned.
He prevails on the senate to grant him an adjournment because he said that his account-books had been sealed up by the accusers of Dolabella; just as if he had not the power of copying them.
This man is the only man who never renders accounts to the treasury.
You have heard the accounts of his quaestorship rendered in three lines; but no accounts of his lieutenancy, till he was condemned and banished who alone could detect any error in them. The accounts of his praetorship, which, according to the decree of the senate, he ought to have rendered immediately on leaving office, he has not rendered to this very day.
He said that he was waiting for the quaestors to appear in the senate; just as if a praetor could not give in his accounts without the quaestor, in the same way as the quaestor does without the praetor, as you did, Hortensius, and as all have done.
He said that Dolabella obtained the same permission.
The omen pleased the conscript fathers rather than the excuse; they admitted it.
But now the quaestors have arrived some time. Why have you not rendered them now?
Among the accounts of that infamous lieutenancy and pro-quaestorship of yours, those items occur which are necessarily set down also in the accounts of Dolabella.
The sum which Dolabella entered to Verres as having been received from him, is less than the sum which Verres has entered as having been paid to him by four hundred and thirty-five thousand sesterces.
The sum which Dolabella made out that Verres received less than he has put down in his account-books, is two hundred and thirty-two thousand sesterces.
Dolabella also made out that on account of corn he had received one million and eight hundred thousand sesterces; as to which you, O most incorruptible man, had quite a different entry in your account-books.
Hence it is that those extraordinary gains of yours have accumulated, which we are examining into without any guide, article by article as we can; hence the account with Quintus and Cnaeus Postumus Curtius, made up of many items;
of which that fellow has not one in his account-books; hence the fourteen hundred thousand sesterces paid to Publius Tadius at Athens, as I will prove by witnesses; hence the praetorship, openly purchased; unless indeed that also is doubtful, how that man became praetor.
Oh, he was a man, indeed, of tried industry and energy, or else of a splendid reputation for economy, or perhaps, which is however of the least importance, for his constant attendance at our assemblies; a man who had lived before his quaestorship with prostitutes and pimps;
who had passed his quaestorship you yourselves know how; who, since that infamous quaestorship, has scarcely been three days in Rome: who, while absent, has not been out of sight, but has been the common topic of conversation for every one on account of his countless iniquities. He, on a sudden, the moment he came to Rome, is made praetor for nothing!
Besides that, other money was paid to buy off accusations.
To whom it was paid is, I think, nothing to me; nothing to the matter in hand.
That it was paid was at the time notorious to every one while the occurrence was recent.
O you most foolish, most senseless man, when you were making up your accounts, and when you wanted to shirk out of the charge of having made extraordinary gains, did you think that you would escape sufficiently from all suspicion, if when you lent men money you did not enter any sums as given to them, and put down no such item at all in your account-books, while the Curtii were giving you credit in their books for all that had been received?
What good did it do you that you had not put down what was paid to them?
Did you think you were going to try your cause by the production of no other account-books than your own?
 However, let us now come to that splendid praetorship and to those crimes which are better known to those who are here present, than even to us who come prepared to speak after long consideration. In dealing with which, I do not doubt that I may not be able to avoid and escape from some blame on the ground of negligence.
For many will say, "He said nothing of the transaction at which I was present; he never touched upon that injury which was done to me, or to my friend, transactions at which I was present.
" To all those who are acquainted with the wrongs this man has done that is, to the whole Roman people I earnestly wish to make this excuse, that it will not be out of carelessness that I shall pass over many things, but because I wish to reserve some points till I produce the witnesses, and because I think it necessary to omit some altogether with a view to brevity, and to the time my speech must take."
I will confess too, though against my will, that, as he never allowed any moment of time to pass free from crime, I have not been able to ascertain fully every iniquity which has been committed by him.
Therefore I beg you to listen to me with respect to the crimes of his praetorship, expecting only to hear those mentioned, both in the matters of deciding law-suits and of insisting on the repair of public buildings, which are thoroughly worthy of a criminal whom it is not worth while to accuse of any small or ordinary offences.
For when he was made praetor, leaving the house of Chelidon after having taken the auspices, he drew the lot of the city province, more in accordance with his own inclination and that of Chelidon, than with the wish of the Roman people.
And observe how he behaved at the very outset, what his intentions were as shown in his first edict.
Publius Annius Asellus died while Caius Sacerdos was praetor.
As he had an only daughter, and as he was not included in the census, he did what nature prompted, and what no law forbade, he appointed his daughter heiress of all his property.
His daughter was his heiress.
Everything made for the orphan; the equity of the law, the wish of the father, the edicts of the praetors, the usage of the law which existed at the time that Asellus died.
That fellow, being praetor elect, (whether being instigated by others, or being tempted by circumstances, or whether, from the instinctive sagacity which he has in such matters, he came of his own accord to this rascality, without any prompter, without any informer, I know not;
you only know the audacity and insanity of the man,) appeals to Lucius Annius as the heir, (who indeed was appointed heir after the daughter,) for I cannot be persuaded that Verres was appealed to by him; he says that he can give him the inheritance by an edict; he instructs the man in what can be done.
To the one the property appeared desirable, the other thought that he could sell it.
That man, although he is of singular audacity, still sent privately to the young girl's mother; he preferred taking money for not issuing any new edict, to interposing so shameful and inhuman a decree.
Her guardians, if they gave money to the praetor in the name of their ward, especially if it were a huge sum, did not see how they could enter it in their accounts; did not see how they could give it except at their own risk; and at the same time they did not believe that he would be so wicked.
Being often applied to, they refused.
I pray you, take notice, how equitable a decree he issued at the will of the man to whom he was giving the inheritance of which the children were robbed.
As I understand that the Lex Voconia .
Who would ever believe that Verres would be an adversary of women?
or did he do something contrary to the interests of women, in order that the whole edict might not appear to have been drawn up at the will of Chelidon.
He wishes, he says, to oppose the covetousness of men.
Oh, certainly. Who, not only in the present age, but even in the times of our ancestors, was ever so far removed from covetousness?
Recite what comes next, I beg; for the gravity of the man, his knowledge of the law, and his authority delight me.
Who, since the censorship of Aulus Postumius and Quintus Fulvius, has made, or shall have made.
Has made, or shall have made!
who ever issued an edict in such a manner?
Who ever proposed by an edict any penalty or danger for an act which could not be provided for otherwise either before the edict or after the edict?
Publius Annius had made his will in accordance with law, with the statutes, with the authority of all who were consulted; a will neither improper, nor made in disregard of any duty, nor contrary to human nature.
But even if he had made such a will as that, still, after his death no new law ought to have been enacted which should have any effect on his will.
I suppose the Voconian law pleased you greatly?
You should have imitated Quintus Voconius himself, who did not by his law take away her inheritance from any female whether virgin or matron, but established a law for the future, that no one who after the year of the existing censors should be enrolled in the census, should make either virgin or matron his heir.
In the Voconian law, there is no "has made or shall have made."
Nor in any law is time past ever implicated in blame, except in cases which are of their own nature wicked and nefarious, so that, even if there were no law, they would be strenuously to be avoided.	"
And in these cases we see that many things are established by law in such a way that things done previously cannot be called in question the Cornelian law the law about testaments, the law about money, and many others, in which no new law is established in the nation, but it is established that what has always been an evil action shall be liable to public prosecution up to a certain time.
But if any one establishes any new regulation on any points of civil law, does he allow everything which has been previously done to remain unaltered?
Look at the Atinian law, at the Furian law, at the Voconian law itself, as I said before; in short, at every law on the subject of civil rights; you will find in all of them that regulations are established which are only to come into operation after the passing of the law.
Those who attribute the greatest importance to the edict, say that the edict of the praetor is an annual law.
You embrace more in an edict than you can in a law.
If the first of January puts an end to the edict of the praetor, why does not the edict have its birth also on the first of January?
Or, is it the case that no one can advance forward by his edict into the year when another man is to be praetor, but that he may retire back into the year when another man has been praetor?
And if you had published this edict for the sake of right, and not for the sake of one man, you would have composed it more carefully.
 You write, "If any one has made, or shall have made his heir."
What are we to think?	Suppose a man has bequeathed in legacies more than comes to his heir or heirs,
as by the Voconian law a man may do who is not included in the census?
Why do you not guard against this, as it comes under the same class?
Because in your expressions you are not thinking of the interests of a class, but of an individual; so that it is perfectly evident that you were influenced by a desire for money.
And if you had issued this edict with only a prospective operation, it would have been less iniquitous; still it would have been scandalous: but in that case, though it might have been blamed, it could not have been doubted about, for no one would have broken it.
Now it is an edict of such a sort, that any one can see that it was written, not for the people, but for the second heir of Publius Annius.
Therefore, though that heading had been embellished by you with so many words, and with that mercenary preamble, was any praetor found afterwards to draw up an edict in similar style?
Not only no one ever did publish such an edict, but no one was ever apprehensive even of any one publishing such an edict.
For after your praetorship many people made wills in the same manner, and among them Annia did so lately. She, by the advice of many of her relations, being a wealthy woman, because she was not included in the census, by her will made her daughter her heiress.
This, now, is great proof of men's opinion of the singular wickedness of that fellow, that, though Verres had established this of his own accord, yet no one was apprehensive that any one could be found to adopt the rule which he had laid down.
For you alone were found to be a man who could not be satisfied with correcting the wills of the living, unless you also rescinded those of the dead.
You yourself removed this clause from your Sicilian edict.
You wished, if any matters arose unexpectedly, to decide them according to your edict as praetor of the city.
The defence which you left yourself afterwards you yourself greatly injured, when you yourself, in your provincial edict, repudiated your own authority.
And I do not doubt that as this action appears bitter and unworthy to me, to whom my daughter is very dear, it appears so also to each one of you who is influenced by a similar feeling and love for his daughters.
For what has nature ordained to be more agreeable and more dear to us?
What is more worthy to have all our affections and all our indulgence expended upon it?
O most infamous of men, why did you do so great an injury to Publius Annius after death?
Why did you cause such indelible grief to his ashes and bones, as to take from his children the property of their father given to then? by the will of their father in accordance with the law and with the statutes, and to give them to whomsoever you pleased?
Shall the praetor be able, when we are dead, to take away our property and our fortunes from those to whom we give them while alive?
He says, "I will neither give any right of petition, nor possession.
" Will you, then, take away from a young girl her purple-bordered robe?"
Will you take away, not only the ornaments of her fortune, but those also denoting her noble birth?
Do we marvel that the citizens of Lampsacus flew to arms against that man?
Do we marvel that when he was leaving his province, he fled secretly from Syracuse?
as if we were as indignant at what happens to others as at our own injury there would not be a relic of that man left to appear in the forum.
The father gives to his daughter: you forbid it. The laws allow it: yet you interpose your authority.
He gives to her of his own property in such a manner as not to infringe any law.
What do you find to blame in that?
Nothing, I think.
But I allow you to do so.
Forbid it if you can; if you can find any one to listen to you; if any one can possibly obey your order.
Will you take away their will from the dead, their property from the living, their rights from all men?
Would not the Roman people have avenged itself by force if it had not reserved you for this occasion and for this trial?
Since the establishment of the praetorian power, we have always adopted this principle, that if no will was produced, then possession was given to that person who would have had the best right to be the heir, if the deceased had died intestate.
Why this is the most righteous principle it is easy to show; but in a matter so established by precedent it is sufficient to point out that all men had previously laid down the law in this way, and that this was the ancient and customary edict.
 Listen to another new edict of the fellow in a case of frequent occurrence; and then, while there is any place where civil law can be learnt, pray send all the youths of Rome to his lectures.
The genius of the man is marvellous; his prudence is marvellous.
A man of the name of Minucius died while he was praetor.
He left no will.
By law his inheritance passed to the Minucian family.
If Verres had issued the edict which all praetors both before and after him did issue, possession would have been given to the Minucian family.
If any thought himself heir by will, though no will was known, he might proceed by law to put forward his claim to the inheritance; or if he had taken security for the claim, and given security, he then proceeded to try an action for his inheritance.
This is the law which, as I imagine, both our ancestors and we ourselves have always been accustomed to.
See, now, how that fellow amended it.
He composes an edict; such language that any one can perceive that it was written for the sake of one individual. He all but names the man;
he details his whole cause; he disregards right, custom, equity, the edicts of all his predecessors.
According to the edict of the city praetor, if any doubt arises about an inheritance, if the possessor does not give security.
What is it to the praetor which is the possessor?
Is not this the point which ought to be inquired into, who ought to be the possessor?
Therefore, because he is in possession, you do not remove him from the possession.
If he were not in possession, you would not give him possession.
For you nowhere say so; nor do you embrace anything else in your edict except that cause for which you had received money.
What follows is ridiculous.
"If any doubt arises about an inheritance, and if testamentary papers are produced before me, sealed with not fewer seals than are required by law, I shall adjudge the inheritance as far as possible according to the testamentary papers. "
So far is usual. This ought to follow next: "If testamentary papers are not produced. "
What says he?
That he will adjudge it to him who says he is the heir.
What, then, is the difference whether testamentary papers are produced or not?
If he produces them, though they may have only one seal less than is required by law, you will not give him possession; but if he produces no such papers at all, you will.
What shall I say now?
That no one else ever issued a similar edict afterwards?
A very marvellous thing, truly, that there should have been no one who chose to be considered like that fellow!
He himself, in his Sicilian edict, has not this passage. No; for he had received his payment for it.
And so in the edict which I have mentioned before, which he issued in Sicily, about giving possession of inheritances, he laid down the same rules which all the praetors at Rome had laid down besides himself.
From the Sicilian edict, "If any doubt arise about an inheritance.
But, in the name of the immortal gods,
what can possibly be said of this business?
For I ask of you now a second time, as I did just now, with reference to the affair of Annia, about the inheritance of females, I ask you now, I say, about the possession of inheritances, why you were unwilling to transfer those paragraphs into your provincial edict?
Did you think those men who were living in the province more worthy to enjoy just laws than we were? Or is one thing just in Rome and another in Sicily?
For you cannot say in this place that there are many things in the province which require to be regulated differently from what they would if they existed at Rome; at all events not in the case of taking possession of inheritances, or of the inheritances of women.
For in both these cases I see that nor only all other magistrates, but that you yourself, have issued edicts word for word the same as those which are accustomed to be issued at Rome.
The clauses which, with great disgrace and for a great bribe, you had inserted in your edict at Rome, those alone, I see, you omitted in your Sicilian edict,
in order not to incur odium in the province for nothing.
And as, while he was praetor elect, he composed his whole edict at the pleasure of those who bought law of him to secure their own advantage; so also, when he had entered on his office, he used to make decrees contrary to his edict without the slightest scruple.
Therefore, Lucius Piso filled many books with the affairs in which he had interposed his authority, because Verres had decreed in a manner contrary to his edict. And I think that you have not forgotten what a multitude and what respectable citizens used to assemble before Piso's seat while that man was praetor, and unless he had had him for a colleague, he would have been stoned in the very forum.
But his injuries at that time appeared of less importance, because there was a refuge always ready in the justice and prudence of Piso, whom men could apply to without any labour, or any trouble, or any expense, and even without a patron to recommend them.
For, I entreat you, recall to your recollection, O judges, what licence that fellow took in determining the law; how great a variation there was in his decrees, what open buying and selling of justice; how empty the houses of all those men who were accustomed to be consulted on points of civil law, how full and crammed was the house of Chelidon.
And when men had come from that woman to him, and had whispered in his ear, at one time he would recall those between whom he had just decided, and alter his decree; at another time he, without the least scruple, gave a decision between other parties quite contrary to the last decision which he had given only a little while before.
Hence it was that men were found who were even ridiculous in their indignation; some of whom, as you have heard, said that it was not strange that such piggish justice should be worthless. Others were colder; but still, because they were angry they seemed ridiculous, while they execrated Sacerdos who had spared so worthless a boar.
And I should hardly mention these things, for they were not extraordinarily witty, nor are they worthy of the gravity of the present subject, if I did not wish you to recollect that his worthlessness and iniquity were constantly in the mouths of the populace, and had become a common proverb.
But shall I first speak of his arrogance towards the Roman people, or his cruelty?
Beyond all question, cruelty is the graver and more atrocious crime.
Do you think then that these men have forgotten how that fellow was accustomed to beat the common people of Rome with rods?
And indeed a tribune of the people touched on that matter in the public assembly, when he produced in the sight of the Roman people the man whom he had beaten with rods. And I will give you the opportunity of taking cognisance of that business at its proper time.
But who is ignorant with what arrogance he behaved?
how he disregarded every one of a low condition, how he despised them, how he did not account the poor to be free men at all?
Publius Trebonius made many virtuous and honourable men his heirs; and among them his own freedman.
He had had a brother, Aulus Trebonius, a proscribed man.
As he wished to make provision for him, he put down in his will, that his heirs should take an oath to manage that not less than half of each man's share should come to Aulus Trebonius, that proscribed brother of his.
The freedman takes the oath; the other heirs go to Verres, and point out to him that they ought not to take such an oath; that they should be doing what was contrary to the Cornelian law, which forbids a proscribed man to be assisted.
They obtain from him authority to refuse the oath. He gives them possession;
that I do not find fault with.
Certainly it was a scandalous thing for any part of his brother's property to be given to a man who was proscribed and in want.
But that freedman thought that he should be committing a wickedness if he did not take the oath in obedience to the will of his patron.
Therefore Verres declares that he will not give him possession of his inheritance, in order that he may not be able to assist his proscribed patron; and also in order that that might serve as a punishment for having obeyed the will of his other patron.
You give possession to him who did not take the oath.
I admit your right to do so; it is a privilege of the praetor.
You take it from him who has taken the oath.
According to what precedent?
He is aiding a proscribed man.
There is a law; there is a punishment established in such a case.
What is that to him who is determining the law?
Do you blame him because he assisted his patron, who was in distress at the time, or because he attended to the wishes of his other patron, who was dead, from whom he had received the greatest of all benefits?
Which of these actions are you blaming?
And then that most admirable man, sitting on his curule chair, said this: "Can a freedman be heir to a Roman knight of such great wealth?"
O how modest must the class of freedmen be, since he departed from that place alive!
I can produce six hundred decrees in which, even if I were not to allege that money had interrupted justice, still the unprecedented and iniquitous nature of the decrees themselves would prove it.
But that by one example you may be able to form your conjectures as to the rest, listen to what you have already heard in the previous pleading.
There was a man called Caius Sulpicius Olympus. He died while Caius Sacerdos was praetor.
I don't know whether it was not before Verres had begun to announce himself as a candidate for the praetorship.
He made Marcus Octavius Ligur his heir.
Ligur thus entered upon his inheritance; he took possession while Sacerdos was praetor, without any dispute.
After Verres entered on his office, in accordance with his edict, an edict such as Sacerdos had not issued, the daughter of the patron of Sulpicius began to claim from Ligur a sixth part of the inheritance.
Lucius Gellius defended the cause of Ligur. He showed that his edict ought not to prevail with respect to those inheritances which had accrued to the heirs before his praetorship; that, if this edict had existed at that time, perhaps Ligur would not have entered upon the inheritance at all.
This just demand, and the highest authority of influential men, was beaten down by money.
Ligur came to Rome; he did not doubt that, if he himself had seen Verres, he should have been able to move the man by the justice of his cause and by his own influence.
He went to him to his house; he explains the whole business; he points out to him how long ago it was that the inheritance had come to him and, as it was easy for an able man to do in a most just cause, he said many things which might have influenced any one.
At last he began to entreat him not to despise his influence and scorn his authority to such an extent as to inflict such an injury upon him. The fellow began to accuse Ligur of being so assiduous and so attentive in a business which was adventitious, and only belonging to him by way of inheritance.
He said that he ought to have a regard for him also; that he required a great deal himself; that the dogs whom he kept about him required a great deal.
I cannot recount those things to you more plainly than you have heard Ligur himself relate them in his evidence.
What are we to say, then, O Verres?
Are we not to give credence to even these men as witnesses?
Are these things not material to the question before us?
Are we not to believe Marcus Octavius? Are we not to believe Lucius Ligur?
Who will believe us? Who shall we believe?
What is there, O Verres which can ever be made plain by witnesses, if this is not made so?
Or is that which they relate a small thing?
It is nothing less than the praetor of the city establishing this law as long as he remains in office, that the praetor ought to be co-heir with all those to whom an inheritance comes.
And can we doubt with what language that fellow was accustomed to address the rest of the citizens of an inferior rank, of inferior authority, and of inferior fortune; with what language he was accustomed to address country people from the municipal towns; with what language he was accustomed to address those whom he never thought free men, I mean, the freedmen;
when he did not hesitate to ask Marcus Octavius Ligur, a man of the highest consideration as to position, rank, name, virtue, ability, and influence, for money for deciding in favour of his undoubted lights?
And as to how he behaved in the matter of putting the public buildings in proper repair, what shall I say?
They have said, who felt it.
There are others, too, who are speaking of this.
Notorious and manifest facts have been brought forward, and shall be brought forward again.
Caius Fannius, a Roman knight, the brother of Quintus Titinius, one of your judges, has said that he gave you money.
Recite the evidence of Caius Fannius.
Read.
Pray do not believe Caius Fannius when he says this; do not believe you I mean, O Quintus Titinius do not believe Caius Fannius, your own brother. For he is saying what is incredible. He is accusing Caius Verres of avarice and audacity; vices which appear to meet in any one else rather than in him.
Quintus Tadius has said something of the same sort, a most intimate friend of the father of Verres, and not unconnected with his mother, either in family or in name.
He has produced his account-books, by which he proves that he had given him money. Recite the particulars of the accounts of Quintus Tadius.
Read.
Read.
Shall we not believe either the account-books of Quintus Tadius, or his evidence?
What then shall we follow in coming to our decision?
What else is giving all men free licence for every possible sin and crime, if it is not the disbelieving the evidence of the most honourable men, and the account books of honest ones?
For why should I mention the daily conversation and daily complaints of the Roman people? why that fellow's most impudent theft, I should rather say, his new and unexampled robber?
how he dared in the temple of Castor, in that most illustrious and renowned monument, a temple which is placed before the eyes and in the daily view of the Roman people, to which the senate is often summoned, where crowded deliberations on the most momentous affairs take place every day, why should I mention his having dared to leave in that place, in contempt of anything any one can say, an eternal monument of his audacity?
 Publius Junius, O judges, had the guardianship, of the temple of Castor.
He left behind him a young son under age.
When Lucius Octavius and Caius Aurelius the consuls had let out contracts for the holy temple, and were not able to examine all the public buildings to see in what repair they were; nor could the praetors to whom that business had been assigned, namely, Caius Sacerdos and Marcus Caesius; a decree of the senate was passed that Caius Verres and Publius Caelius, the praetors should examine into and decide about those public buildings as to which no examination or decision had yet taken place.
And after this power was conferred on him, that man, as you have learnt from Caius Fannius and from Quintus Tadius, as he had committed his robberies in every sort of affair without the least disguise and with the greatest effrontery, wished to leave this as a most visible record of his robberies, which we might, not occasionally hear of, but see every day of our lives.
He inquired who was bound to deliver up the temple of Castor in good repair.
He knew that Junius himself was dead; he desired to know to whom his property belonged.
He hears that his son is under age.
The fellow, who had been in the habit of saying openly that boys and girls who were minors were the surest prey for the praetors, said that the thing he had so long wished for had been brought into his bosom.
He thought that, in the care of a monument of such vast size, of such laborious finish, however sound and in however thorough a state of repair it might be, he should certainly find something to do, and some excuse for plunder.
The temple of Castor ought to have been entrusted to Lucius Rabonius. He by chance was the guardian of the young Junius by his father's will.
An agreement had been made between him and his ward, without any injury to either, in what state it should be given up to him.
Verres summons Rabonius to appear before him he asks him whether there is anything which has not been handed over to him by his ward, which might be exacted from him.
When he said, as was the case, that the delivery of the temple had been very easy for his ward; that all the statues and presents were in their places, that the temple itself was sound in every part; that fellow began to think it a shameful thing if he was to give up so large a temple and so extensive a work without enriching himself by booty, and especially by booty to be got from a minor.
He comes himself into the temple of Castor; he looks all over the temple; he sees the roof adorned all over with a most splendid ceiling, and all the rest of the building as good as new and quite sound.
He ponders; he considers what he can do.
Some one of those dogs, of whom he himself had said to Ligur that there were a great number about him, said to him "You, O Verres, have nothing which you can do here, unless you like to try the pillars by a plumb-line. "
The man, utterly ignorant of everything, asks what is the meaning of the expression, "by a plumb-line.
" They tell him that there is hardly any pillar which is exactly perpendicular when tried by a plumb-line."
By my truth, says he, "that is what we must do; let the pillars be tested by a plumb-line.
" Rabonius, like a man who knew the law, in which law the number of the pillars only is set down, but no mention made of a plumb-line, and who did not think it desirable for himself to receive the temple on such terms, lest he should be hereafter expected to hand it over under similar conditions, says that he is not to be treated in that way, and that such an examination has no right to be made."
That man orders Rabonius to be quiet, and at the same time holds out to him some hopes of a partnership with himself in the business.
He easily overpowers him, a moderate man, and not at all obstinate in his opinions; and so he adheres to his determination of having the pillars examined.
This unprecedented resolve, and the unexpected calamity of the minor, is immediately reported to Caius Mustius, the step-father of the youth, who is lately dead; to Marcus John Adams, his uncle, and to Publius Potitius, his guardian, a most frugal man.
They report the business to a man of the greatest consideration, of the greatest benevolence and virtue, Marcus Marcellus, who was also a guardian of the minor.
Marcus Marcellus comes to Verres; he begs of him with many arguments, in the name of his own good faith and diligence in his office, not to endeavour to deprive Junius his ward of his father's fortune by the greatest injustice.
That man, who had already in hope and belief devoured that booty, was neither influenced by the justice of Marcus Marcellus's argument, nor by his authority. And therefore he answered that he should proceed with the examination, according to the orders which he had given.
As they found that or all applications to this man were ineffectual, all access to him difficult, and almost impossible, being, as he was, a man with whom neither right, nor equity, nor mercy, nor the arguments of a relation, nor the wishes of a friend, nor the influence of any one had any weight, they resolve that the best thing which they could do, as indeed might have occurred to any one, was to beg Chelidon for her aid, who, while Verres was praetor, was not only the real judge in all civil law, and in the disputes of all private individuals, but who was supreme also in this affair of the repairs of the public buildings.
 Caius Mustius, a Roman knight, a farmer of the revenues, a man of the very highest honour, came to Chelidon.
Marcus Junius, the uncle of the youth, a most frugal and temperate man, came to her; a man who shows his regard for his high rank by the greatest honour, and modesty, and attention to his duties. Publius Potitius, his guardian, came to her.
Oh that praetorship of yours, bitter to many, miserable, scandalous?
To say nothing of other points, with what shame, with what indignation, do you think that such men as these went to the house of a prostitute?
men who would have encountered such disgrace on no account, unless the urgency of their duty and of their relationship to the injured youth had compelled them to do so.
They came, as I say, to Chelidon.
The house was full; new laws, new decrees, new decisions were being solicited:
"Let him give me possession. "
"Do not let him take away from me."
. Do not let him give sentence against me.
. Let him adjudge the property to me. "
Some were paying money, some were signing documents.
The house was full, not with a prostitute's train, but rather with a crowd seeking audience of the praetor.
As soon as they can get access to her, the men whom I have mentioned go to her.
Mustius speaks, he explains the whole affair, he begs for her assistance, he promises money.
She answers, considering she was a prostitute, not unreasonably: she says that she will gladly do what they wish, and that she will talk the matter over with Verres carefully; and desires Mustius to come again.
Then they depart. The next day they go again.
She says that the man cannot be prevailed on, that he says that a vast sum can be made of the business.
I am afraid that perhaps some of the people, who were not present at the former pleading, (because these things seem incredible on account of their consummate baseness,) may think that they are invented by me.
You, O judges, have known them before.
Publius Potitius, the guardian of the minor Junius, stated them on his oath.
So did Marcus Junius, his uncle and guardian.
So would Mustius have stated them if he had been alive; but as Mustius cannot, Lucius Domitius stated that while the affair was recent, he heard these things stated by Mustius; and though he knew that I had had the account from Mustius while he was alive, for I was very intimate with him;
(and indeed I defended Caius Mustius when he gained that trial which he had about almost the whole of his property ;) though, I say, Lucius Domitius knew that I was aware that Mustius was accustomed to tell him all his affairs, yet he said nothing about Chelidon as long as he could help it; he directed his replies to other points.
So great was the modesty of that most eminent young man, of that pattern for the youth of the city, that for some time, though he was pressed by me on that point, he would rather give any answer than mention the name of Chelidon. At first, he said that the friends of Verres had been deputed to mention the subject to him; at last, after a time, being absolutely compelled to do so, he named Chelidon.
Are you not ashamed, O Verres, to have carried on your praetorship according to the will of that woman, whom Lucius Domitius scarcely thought it creditable to him even to mention the name of?
Being rejected by Chelidon, they adopt the necessary resolution of undertaking the business themselves.
They settle the business, which ought to have come to scarcely forty thousand sesterces, with Rabonius the other guardian, for two hundred thousand.
Rabonius reports the fact to that man; as it seems to him the exaction has been sufficiently enormous and sufficiently shameless.
He, who had expected a good deal more, receives Rabonius with harsh language, and says that he cannot satisfy him with such a settlement as that. To cut the matter short, he says that he shall issue contracts for the job.
The guardians are ignorant of this; they think that what has been settled with Rabonius is definitely arranged they fear no further misfortune for their ward.
But that man does not procrastinate; he begins to let out his contracts, (without issuing any advertisement or notice of the day,) at a most unfavourable time at the very time of the Roman games, and while the forum is decorated for them.
Therefore Rabonius gives notice to the guardians that he renounces the settlement to which he had come.
However, the guardians come at the appointed time; Junius, the uncle of the youth, bids.
Verres began to change colour: his countenance, his speech, his resolution failed him.
He begins to consider what he was to do.
If the contract was taken by the minor, if the affair slipped through the fingers of the purchaser whom he himself had provided, he would get no plunder.
Therefore He contrives what?
Nothing very cleverly, nothing of which any one could say, "it was a rascally trick, but still a deep one.
" Do not expect any disguised roguery from him, any underhand trick; you will find everything open, undisguised, shameless, senseless, audacious.	"
"If the contract be taken by the minor, all the plunder is snatched out of my hands; what then is the remedy?
What?
The minor must not be allowed to have the contract.
" Where is the usage in the case of selling property, securities, or lands adopted by every consul, and censor, and praetor, and quaestor, that that bidder shall have the preference to whom the property belongs, and at whose risk the property is sold?	"
He excludes that bidder alone to whom alone, I was nearly saying, the power of taking the contract ought to have been offered.
For why, so the youth might say "should any one aspire to my money against my will!
What does he come forward for?
The contract is let out for a work which is to be done and paid for out of my money.
I say that it is I who am going to put the place in repair, the inspection of it afterwards will belong to you who let out the contract.
You have taken sufficient security for the interests of the people with bonds and sureties;
and if you do not think sufficient security has been taken, will you as praetor send whomsoever you please to take possession of my property, and not permit me to come forward in defence of my own fortune?"
It is worth while to consider the words of the contract itself. You will say that the same man drew it up who drew up that edict about inheritance.
The contract for work to be done, which the minor Junius's.
Speak, I pray you, a little more plainly.
"Caius Verres, the praetor of the city, has added."
" The contracts of the censors are being amended."
For what do they say?
I see in many old documents, "Cnaeus Domitius, Lucius Metellus, Lucius Cassius, Cnaeus Servilius have added. "
Caius Verres wants something of the same sort.
Read.
What has he added?
"Admit not as a partner in this work any one who has taken a contract from Lucius Marcius and Marcus Perperna the censors; give him no snare in it; and let him not contract for it.
" Why so?"
Is it that the work may not be faulty?
But the inspection afterwards belonged to you.
Lest he should not have capital enough?
But sufficient security had been taken for the people's interest in bonds and sureties, and more security still might have been had.
If in this case the business itself, if the scandalous nature of your injustice had no weight with you;
if the misfortune of this minor, the tears of his relations, the peril of Decimus Brutus, whose lands were pledged as security for him, and the authority of Marcus Marcellus his guardian had no influence with you, did you not even consider this, that your crime would be such that you would neither be able to deny it, (for you had entered it in your account-books,) nor, if you confessed it, to make any excuse for it?
The contract is knocked down at five hundred and fifty thousand sesterces, while the guardians kept crying out that they could do it even to the satisfaction of the most unjust of men, for eighty thousand.
In truth, what was the job?
That which you saw. All those pillars which you see whitewashed, had a crane put against them, were taken down at a very little expense, and put up again of the same stone as before.
And you let this work out for five hundred and sixty thousand sesterces.
And among those pillars I say that there are some which have never been moved at all by your contractor. I say that there are some which only had the outer coat scraped off, and a fresh coat put on.
But, if I had thought that it cost so much to whitewash pillars, I should certainly never have stood for the aedileship.
Still, in order that something might appear to be really being done, and that it might not seem to be a mere robbery of a minor "If in the course of the work you injure anything, you must repair it. "
What was there that he could injure, when he was only putting back every stone in its place?
He who takes the contract must give security to bear the man harmless who has taken the work from the former contractor.
He is joking when he orders Rabonius to give himself security.
Ready money is to be paid.
Out of what funds?
From his funds who cried out that he would do for eighty thousand sesterces what you let out at five hundred and sixty thousand.
Out of what funds?
out of the funds of a minor, whose tender age and desolate condition, even if he had no guardians, the praetor himself ought to protect.
But as his guardians did protect him, you took away not only his paternal fortune, but the property of the guardians also.
"Execute the work in the best materials of every sort. "
Was any stone to be cut and brought to the place?
Nothing was to be brought but the crane.
For no stone, no materials at all were brought; there was just as much to be done in that contract as took a little labour of artisans at low wages, and there was the hire of the crane.
Do you think it was less work to make one entirely new pillar without any old stone, which could be worked up again, or to put back those four in their places?
No one doubts that it is a much a better job to make one new one.
I will prove that in private houses, where there has been a great deal of expensive carriage, pillars no smaller than these are contracted for to be placed in an open court for forty thousand sesterces apiece.
But it is folly to argue about such manifest shamelessness of that man at any greater length, especially when in the whole contract he has openly disregarded the language and opinion of every one, inasmuch as he has added at the bottom of it, "Let him have the old materials for himself.
" As if any old materials were taken from that work, and as if the whole work were not done with old materials.	"
But still, if the minor was not allowed to take the contract, it was not necessary for it to come to Verres himself: some other of the citizens might have undertaken the work.
Every one else was excluded no less openly than the minor.
He appointed a day by which the work must be completed the first of December. He gives out the contract about the thirteenth of September: every one is excluded by the shortness of the time.
What happens then?
How does Rabonius contrive to have his work done by that day?
No one troubles Rabonius, neither on the first of December, nor on the fifth, nor on the thirteenth.
At last Verres himself goes away to his province some time before the work is completed.
After he was prosecuted, at first he said that he could not enter the work in his accounts; when Rabonius pressed it, he attributed the cause of it to me, because I had sealed up his books.
Rabonius applies to me, and sends his friends to apply to me; he easily gets what he wishes for;
Verres did not know what he was to do.
By not having entered it in his accounts, he thought he should be able to make some defence; but he felt sure that Rabonius would reveal the whole of the transaction. Although, what could be more plain than it now is, even without the evidence of any witness whatever. At last he enters the work in Rabonius's name as undertaken by him, four years after the day which he had fixed for its completion.
He would never have allowed such terms as those if any other citizen had been the contractor; when he had shut out all the other contractors by the early day which he had fixed, and also because men did not choose to put themselves in the power of a man who, if they took the contract, thought that his plunder was torn from his hands.
For why need we discuss the point where the money went to? He himself has showed us.
First of all, when Decimus Brutus contended eagerly against him, who paid five hundred and sixty thousand sesterces of his own money; and as he could not resist him, though he had given out the job, and taken securities for its execution, he returned him a hundred and ten thousand.
Now if this had been another man's money, he clearly could not have done so.
In the second place, the money was paid to Cornificius, whom he cannot deny to have been his secretary.
Lastly, the accounts of Rabonius himself cry out loudly that the plunder was Verres's own.
Read "The items of the accounts of Rabonius. "
 Even in this place in the former pleadings Quintus Hortensius complained that the young Junius came clad in his praetexta into your presence, and stood with his uncle while he was giving his evidence; and said that I was seeking to rouse the popular feeling, and to excite odium against him, by producing the boy.
What then was there, O Hortensius, to rouse the popular feeling?
what was there to excite odium in that boy, I suppose, forsooth, I had brought forward the son of Gracchus, or of Saturninus, or of some man of that sort, to excite the feelings of an ignorant multitude by the mere name and recollection of his father.
He was the son of Publius Junius, one of the common people of Rome; whom his dying father thought he ought to recommend to the protection of guardians and relations, and of the laws, and of the equity of the magistrates, and of your administration of justice.
He, through the wicked letting out of contracts by that man, and through his nefarious robbery, being deprived of all his paternal property and fortune, came before your tribunal, if for nothing else, at least to see him through whose conduct he himself has passed many years in mourning, a little less gaily dressed than he was used to be.
Therefore, O Hortensius, it was not his age but his cause, not his dress but his fortune, that seemed to you calculated to rouse the popular feeling. Nor did it move you so much that he had come with the praetexta, as that he had come without the bulla.
For no one was influenced by that dress which custom and the right of his free birth allowed him to wear. Men were indignant, and very indignant, that the ornament of childhood which his father had given him, the proof and sign of his good fortune, had been taken from him by that robber.
Nor were the tears which were shed for him shed more by the people than by us, and by yourself, O Hortensius, and by those who are to pronounce sentence in this cause.
For because it is the common cause of all men, the common danger of all men, such wickedness like a conflagration must be put out by the common endeavours of all men.
For we have little children; it is uncertain how long the life of each individual among us may last.
We, while alive, ought to take care and provide that their desolate condition and childhood may be secured by the strongest possible protection.
For who is there who can defend the childhood of our children against the dishonesty of magistrates?
Their mother, I suppose.
No doubt, the mother of Annia, though a most noble woman, was a great protection to her when she was left a minor. No doubt she, by imploring the aid of gods and men, prevented him from robbing her infant ward of her father's fortunes.
Can their guardians defend them?
Very easily, no doubt, with a praetor of that sort by whom both the arguments, and the earnestness, and the authority of Marcus Marcellus in the cause of his ward Junius were disregarded.
Do we ask what he did in the distant province of Phrygia? what in the most remote parts of Pamphylia? What a robber of pirates he proved himself in war, who had been found to be a nefarious plunderer of the Roman people in the forum?
Do we doubt what that man would do with respect to spoils taken from the enemy, who appropriated to himself so much plunder from the spoils of Lucius Metellus? who let out a contract for whitewashing four pillars at a greater price than Metellus paid for erecting the whole of them?
Must we wait to hear what the witnesses from Sicily say?
Who has ever seen that temple who is not a witness of your avarice, of your injustice, of your audacity?
Who has ever come from the statue of Vertumnus into the Circus Maximus, without being reminded at every step of your avarice?
for that road, the road of the sacred cars and of such solemn processions, you have had repaired in such a way that you yourself do not dare go by it.
Can any one think that when you were separated from Italy by the sea you spared the allies?
You who chose the temple of Castor to be the witness of your thefts?
which the Roman people saw every day, and even the judges at the very moment that they were giving their decision concerning you.
 And he, even during his praetorship, exercised the office of judge in public cases.
For even that must not be passed over.
A fine was sought to be recovered from Quintus Opimius before him while praetor; who was brought to trial, as it was alleged, indeed, because while tribune of the people he had interposed his veto in a manner contrary to the Cornelian law, but, in reality, because while tribune of the people he had said something which gave offence to some one of the nobles.
And if I were to wish to say anything of that decision, I should have to call in question and to attack many people, which it is not necessary for me to do. I will only say that a few arrogant men, to say the least of them, with his assistance, ruined all the fortunes of Quintus Opimius in fun and joke.
Again; does he complain of me, because the first pleading of his cause was brought to an end by me in nine days only; when before himself as judge. Quintus Opimius, a senator of the Roman people, in three hours lost his property, his position, and all his titles of honour?
On account of the scandalous nature of which decision, the question has often been mooted in the senate of taking away the whole class of fines and sentences of that sort.
But what plunder he amassed in selling the property of Quintus Opimius, and how openly, how scandalously he amassed it, it would take too long to relate now. This I say, unless I make it plain to you by the account-books of most honourable men, believe that I have invented it all for the present occasion.
Now the man who profiting by the disaster of a Roman senator, at whose trial he had presided while praetor, endeavoured to strip him of his spoils and carry them to his own house, has he a right to deprecate any calamity to himself?
For as for the choosing of other judges by Junius, of that I say nothing.
For why should I?
Should I venture to speak against the lists which you produced?
It is difficult to do so; for not only does your own influence and that of the judges deter me, but also the golden ring of your secretary.
I will not say that which it is difficult to prove; I will say this which I will prove, that many men of the first consequence heard you say that you ought to be pardoned for having produced a false list, for that, unless you had guarded against it, you yourself would also have been ruined by the same storm of unpopularity as that under which Caius Junius fell.
In this way has that fellow learnt to take care of himself and of his own safety, by entering both in his own private registers and in the public documents what had never happened; by effacing all mention of what had; and by continually taking away something, changing something (taking care that no erasure was visible), interpolating something.
For he has come to such a pitch, that he cannot even find a defence for his crimes without committing other grimes.
That most senseless man thought that such a substitution of his own judges also could be effected by the instrumentality of his comrade, Quintus Curtius, who was to be principal judge;
and unless I had prevented that by the power of the people, and the outcries and reproaches of all men, the advantage of having judges taken from this decuria of our body, whose influence it was desirable for me should be rendered as extensive an possible, while he was substituting others for them without any reason, and placing on the bench those whom Verres had approved.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE SECOND PLEADING AGAINST CAIUS VERRES.
CONCERNING HIS MANNER OF DECIDING CAUSES AS JUDGE WHILE IN SICILY.
Many things, O judges, must be necessarily passed over by me, in order that I may be able at last to speak in some manner of those matters which have been entrusted to my good faith.
For I have undertaken the cause of Sicily; that is the province which has tempted me to this business.
But when I took upon myself this burden, and undertook the cause of Sicily, in my mind I embraced a wider range, for I took upon myself also the cause of my whole order I took upon myself the cause of the Roman people; because I thought that in that case alone could a just decision be come to, if not only a wicked criminal was brought up, but if at the same time a diligent and firm accuser came before the court.
On which account I must the sooner come to the cause of Sicily omitting all mention of his other thefts and iniquities, in order that I may be able to handle it while my strength is yet unimpaired, and that I may have time enough to dilate fully on the business.
And before I begin to speak of the distresses of Sicily, it seems to me that I ought to say a little of the dignity and antiquity of that province, and of the advantage which it is to us.
For as you ought to have a careful regard for all the allies and provinces, so especially ought you to have a regard for Sicily, O judges, for many, and those the greatest, reasons: First, because of all foreign nations Sicily was the first who joined herself to the friendship and alliance of the Roman people.
She was the first to be called a province; and the provinces are a great ornament to the empire.
She was the first who taught our ancestors how glorious a thing it was to rule over foreign nations. She alone has displayed such good faith and such good will towards the Roman people, that the states of that island which have once come into our alliance have never revolted afterwards, but many of them, and those the most illustrious of them, have remained firm to our friendship for ever.
Therefore our ancestors made their first strides to dominion over Africa from this province.
Nor would the mighty power of Carthage so soon have fallen, if Sicily had not been open to us, both as a granary to supply us with corn, and as a harbour for our fleets. Wherefore, Publius Africanus, when he had destroyed Carthage, adorned the cities of the Sicilians with most beautiful statues and monuments, in order to place the greatest number of monuments of his victory among those whom he thought were especially delighted at the victory of the Roman people.
Afterwards that illustrious man, Marcus Marcellus himself, whose valour in Sicily was felt by his enemies, his mercy by the conquered, and his good faith by all the Sicilians, not only provided in that war for the advantage of his allies, but spared even his conquered enemies.
When by valour and skill he had taken Syracuse, that most beautiful city, which was not only strongly fortified by art, but was protected also by its natural advantages by the character of the ground about it, and by the sea he not only allowed it to remain without any diminution of its strength,
but he left it so highly adorned, as to be at the same time a monument of his victory, of his clemency, and of his moderation; when men saw both what he had subdued, and whom he had spared, and what he had left behind him.
He thought that Sicily was entitled to have so much honour paid to her, that he did not think that he ought to destroy even an enemy's city in an island of such allies.
And therefore we have always so esteemed the island of Sicily for every purpose, as to think that whatever she could produce was not so much raised among the Sicilians as stored up in our own homes.
When did she not deliver the corn which she was bound to deliver, by the proper day?
When did she fail to promise us, of her own accord, whatever she thought we stood in need of?
When did she ever refuse anything which was exacted of her?
Therefore that illustrious Marcus Cato the wise called Sicily a storehouse of provisions for our republic the nurse of the Roman people.
But we experienced, in that long and difficult Italian war which we encountered, that Sicily was not only a storehouse of provisions to us, but was also an old and well-filled treasury left us by our ancestors; for, supplying us with hides, with tunics, and with corn, it clothed, armed, and fed our most numerous armies, without any expense at all to us.
What more need I say?
How great are these services, O judges, which perhaps we are hardly aware we are receiving,
that we have many wealthy citizens, that they have a province with which they are connected, faithful and productive to which they may easily make excursions, where they may be welcome to engage in traffic;
citizens, some of whom she dismisses with gain and profit by supplying them with merchandise, some she retains, as they take a fancy to turn farmers, or graziers, or traders in her land, or even to pitch in it their habitations and their homes.
And this is no trifling advantage to the Roman people, that so vast a number of Roman citizens should be detained so near home by such a respectable and profitable business.
And since our tributary nations and our provinces are, as it were, farms belonging to the Roman people; just as one is most pleased with those farms which are nearest to one, so too the suburban character of this province is very acceptable to the Roman people.
And as to the inhabitants themselves, O judges, such is their patience their virtue, and their frugality, that they appear to come very nearly up to the old-fashioned manners of our country, and not to those which now prevail. There is nothing then like the rest of the Greeks; no sloth, no luxury; on the contrary there is the greatest diligence in all public and private affairs, the greatest economy, and the greatest vigilance.
Moreover, they are so fond of our nation that they are the only people where neither a publican nor a money-changer is unpopular.
And they have born the injuries of many of our magistrates with such a disposition, that they have never till this time fled by any public resolution to the altar of our laws and to your protection;
although they endured the misery of that year which so prostrated them that they could not have been preserved through it, if Caius Marcellus had not come among them, by some special providence, as it were, in order that the safety of Sicily might be twice secured by the same family. Afterwards, too, they experienced that terrible government of Marcus Antonius.
For they had had these principles handed down to them from their ancestors, that the kindnesses of the Roman people to the Sicilians had been so great, that they ought to think even the injustice of some of our men endurable.
The states have never before this man's time given any public evidence against any one. And they would have borne even this man himself, if he had sinned against them like a man, in any ordinary manner; or in short, in any one single kind of tyranny.
But as they were unable to endure luxury, cruelty, avarice, and pride, when they had lost by the wickedness and lust of one man all their own advantages, all their own rights, and all fruits of the kindness of the senate and the Roman people, they determined either to avenge themselves for the injuries they had suffered from that man by your instrumentality
or if they seemed to you unworthy of receiving aid and assistance at your hands, then to leave their cities and their homes, since they had already left their fields, having been driven out of them by his injuries.
With this design all the deputations begged of Lucius Metellus that he would come as his successor as early as possible; with these feelings, they so often bewailed their miseries to their patrons; agitated by this indignation, they addressed the consuls with demands, which seemed to be not demands, but charges against that tyrant.
They contrived also, by their indignation and their tears, to draw me, whose good faith and moderation they had experienced, almost from the employment of my life, in order to become his accuser; an action with which both the settled plan of my life and my inclination are utterly inconsistent (although in this business I appear to have undertaken a cause which has more parts of defence than of accusation in it).
Lastly, the most noble men and the chief men of the whole province have come forward both publicly and privately; every city of the greatest authority every city of the highest reputation have come forward with the greatest earnestness to prosecute its oppressor for its injuries.
But how, O judges, have they come?
It seems to me that I ought to speak before you now on behalf of the Sicilians with more freedom than perhaps they themselves wish.
For I shall consult their safety rather than their inclination.
Do you think that there was ever any criminal in any province defended in his absence against the inquiry into his conduct urged by his accuser, with such influence, and with such zeal?
The quaestors of both provinces, who were so while he was praetor, stood close to me with their forces. Those also who succeeded them, very zealous for his interests, liberally fed from his stores, were no less vehement against me.
See how great was his influence who had four quaestors in one province, most zealous defenders and bulwarks of his cause; and the praetor and all his train so zealous in his interest, that it was quite plain, that it was not Sicily, which they had come upon when stripped bare, so much as Verres himself, who had left it loaded, which they looked upon as their province.
They began to threaten the Sicilians, if they decreed any deputations to make statements against him; to threaten any one who had gone on any such deputation, to make most liberal promises to others, if they spoke well of him; to detain by force and under guard the most damaging witnesses of his private transactions, whom we had summoned by word of mouth to give evidence.
And though all this was done, yet know ye, that there was but one single city, that, namely, of the Mamertines, which by public resolution sent ambassadors to speak in his favour.
But you heard the chief man of that embassy, the most noble man of that state, Caius Eleius, speak on his oath, and say, that Verres had had a transport of the largest size built at Messana, the work being contracted for at the expense of the city.
And that same ambassador of the Mamertines, his panegyrist, said that he had not only robbed him of his private property, but had also carried away his sacred vessels, and the images of the Di Penates, which he had received from his ancestors, out of his house.
A noble panegyric; when the one business of the ambassadors is discharged by two operations, praising the man and demanding back what has been stolen by him.
And on what account that very city is friendly to him, shall be told in its proper place.
For you will find that those very things which are the causes of the Mamertines bearing him good-will, are themselves sufficiently just causes for his condemnation.
No other city, O judges, praises him by public resolution.
The power of supreme authority has had so much influence with a very few men, not in the cities, that either some most insignificant people of the most miserable and deserted towns were found who would go to Rome without the command of their people or their senate, or on the other hand, those who had been voted as ambassadors against him, and who had received the public evidence to deliver, and the public commission, were detained by force or by fear.
And I am not vexed at this having happened in a few instances, in order that the rest of the cities, so numerous, so powerful, and so wise, that all Sicily, in short, should have all the more influence with you when you see that they could be restrained by no force, could be hindered by no danger, from making experiment whether the complaints of your oldest and most faithful allies had any weight with you.
For as to what some of you may, perhaps, have heard, that he had a public encomium passed upon him by the Syracusans, although in the former pleading you learnt from the evidence of Heraclius the Syracusan what sort of encomium it was, still it shall be proved to you in another place how the whole matter really stands as far as that city is concerned For you shall see clearly that no man has ever been so hated by any people as that man both is and has been by the Syracusans.
But perhaps it is only the native Sicilians who are persecuting him: the Roman citizens who are trading in Sicily defend him, love him, desire his safety.
First of all, if that were the case, still in this trial for extortion, which has been established for the sake of the allies, according to that law and forms of proceeding which the allies are entitled to, you ought to listen to the complaints of the allies.
But you were able to see clearly in the former pleading, that many Roman citizens from Sicily, most honourable men, gave evidence about most important transactions, both as to injuries which they had received themselves, and injuries which they knew had been inflicted on others.
I, O judges, affirm in this way what I know.
I seem to myself to have done an action acceptable to the Sicilians in seeking to avenge their injuries with my own labour, at my own peril, and at the risk of incurring enmity in some quarters; and I am sure that this which I am doing is not less acceptable to our own citizens, who think that the safety of their rights, of their liberty, of their properties and fortunes, consists in tho condemnation of that man.
On which account, while speaking of his Sicilian praetorship, I will not object to your listening to me on this condition, that if he has been approved of by any description of men whatever; whether of Sicilians or of our own citizens; if he has been approved of by any class of men, whether agriculturists, or graziers, or merchants; if he has not been the common enemy and plunderer of all these men, if, in short, he has ever spared any man in any thing, then you, too, shall spare him.
Now, as soon as Sicily fell to him by lot as his province, immediately at Rome, while he was yet in the city, before he departed, he began to consider within himself and to deliberate with his friends, by what means he might make the greatest sum of money in that province in one year.
He did not like to learn while he was acting, (though he was not entirely ignorant and inexperienced in the oppression of a province,) but he wished to arrive in Sicily with all his plans for plunder carefully thought of and prepared.
Oh how correct was the augury diffused by common report and common conversation among the people in that province!
when from his very name men augured in a jesting way what he would do in the province.
Indeed, who could doubt, when they recollected his flight and robbery in his quaestorship when they considered his spoliation of temples and shrines in his lieutenancy when they saw in the forum the plunder of his praetorship what sort of man he was likely to prove in the fourth act of his villainy?
And that you may be aware that he inquired at Rome not only into the different kinds of robbery which he might be able to execute, but into the very names of his victims, listen to this most certain proof, by which you will be able more easily to form an opinion of his unexampled impudence.
The very day on which he reached Sicily, (see now whether he was not come, according to that omen bruited about the city,) prepared to sweep the province pretty clean, he immediately sends letters from Messana to Halesa, which I suppose he had written in Italy.
For, as soon as he disembarked from the ship, he gave orders that Dio of Halesa should come to him instantly; saying that he wished to make inquiry about an inheritance which had come to his son from a relation, Apollodorus Laphiro.
It was, O judges, a very large sum of money.
This Dio, O judges, is now, by the kindness of Quintus Metellus, become a Roman citizen; and in his case it was proved to your satisfaction at the former pleading, by the evidence of many men of the highest consideration, and by the account-books of many men, that a million of sesterces had been paid in order that, after Verres had inquired into the cause, in which there could no possible doubt exist, he might have a decision in his favour;
that, besides that all herds of the highest-bred mares were driven away, that all the plate and embroidered robes which he had in his home were carried off; so that Quintus Dio lost eleven hundred thousand sesterces because an inheritance had come to him, and for no other reason.
What are we to say?
Who was praetor when this inheritance came to the son of Dio?
The same man who was so when hers came to Annia the daughter of Publius Annius the senator, the same who was so when his was left to Marcus Ligur the senator, namely Caius Sacerdos.
What are we to say?
Had no one been troublesome to Dio on the subject at the time?,
No more than they had to Ligur, while Sacerdos was praetor.
What then?
Did any one make any complaint to Verres?
Nobody, unless perhaps you suppose that the informers were ready for him at the strait.
When he was still at Rome, he heard that a very great inheritance had come to a certain Sicilian named Dio; that the heir had been enjoined by the terms of the will to erect statues in the forum; that, unless he erected them, he was to be liable to forfeiture to Venus Erycina.
Although they had been erected in compliance with the will, still he; Verres, thought, since the name of Venus was mentioned, that he could find some pretext for making money of it.
Therefore he sets up a man to claim that inheritance for Venus Erycina.
For it was not (as would have been usual) the quaestor in whose province Mount Eryx was, who made the demand.
A fellow of the name of Naevius Turpo is the claimant, a spy and emissary of Verres, the most infamous of all that band of informers of his, who had been condemned in the praetorship of Caius Sacerdos for many wickednesses. For the cause was such that the very praetor himself when he was seeking for an accuser, could not find one a little more respectable than this fellow.
Verres acquits his man of any forfeiture to Venus, but condemns him to pay forfeit to himself.
He preferred, forsooth, to have men do wrong rather than gods; he preferred himself to extort from Dio what was contrary to law, rather than to let Venus take anything that was not due to her.
Why need I now in this place recite the evidence of Sextus Pompeius Chlorus, who pleaded Dio's cause?
who was concerned in the whole business?
A most honourable man, and, although he has long ago been made a Roman citizen in reward for his virtues, still the very chief man and the most noble of all the Sicilians.
Why need I recite the evidence of Quintus Caecilius Dio himself, a most admirable and moderate man?
Why need I recite that of Lucius Vetecilius Ligur, of Titus Manlius, of Lucius Calenus?
by the evidence of all of whom this case about Dio's money was fully established.
Marcus Lucullus said the same thing that he had long ago known all the facts of the tyranny practised on Dio, through the connection of hospitality which existed between them.
What?
Did Lucullus, who was at that time in Macedonia, know all these things better than you, O Hortensius, who were at Rome?
you to whom Dio fled for aid?
you who expostulated with Verres by letter in very severe terms about the injuries done to Dio?
Is an this new to you now, and unexpected?
is this the first time your ears have heard of this crime?,
Did you hear nothing of it from Dio, nothing from your own mother-in-law, that most admirable woman, Servilia, an ancient friend and connection of Dio's?
Are not my witnesses ignorant of many circumstances which you are acquainted with?
Is it not owing, not to the innocence of your client, but to the exception made by the law, that I am prevented from summoning you as a witness on my side on this charge?
Does not this Venereal man, who went forth from the bosom of Chelidon to his province, appear to you to have got a sufficiently large sum by means of the name of Verres?
Listen now to a no less shamelessly false accusation in a case where a smaller sum was involved.
Sosippus and Epicrates were brothers of the town of Agyrium; their father died twenty-two years ago, by whose will, if anything were done wrongly in any point, there was to be a forfeiture of his property to Venus.
In the twentieth year after his death, though there had been in the interim so many praetors, so many quaestors, and so many false accusers in the province, the inheritance was claimed from the brothers in the name of Venus.
Verres takes cognisance of the cause; by the agency of Volcatius he receives money from the two brothers, about four hundred thousand sesterces.
You have heard the evidence of many people already; the brothers of Agyrium gained their cause, but on such terms that they left the court stripped and beggared.
 Oh, but that money never came to Verres.
What does that defence mean?
is that asserted in this case, or only put out as a feeler?
For to me it is quite a new light.
Verres set up the accusers; Verres summoned the brother to appear before him; Verres heard the cause; Verres gave sentence.
A vast sum was paid; they who paid it gained the cause;
and you argue in defence "that money was not paid to Verres. "
I can help you; my witnesses too say the same thing; they say they paid it to Volcatius.
How did Volcatius acquire so much power as to get four hundred thousand sesterces from two men?
Would any one have given Volcatius, if he had come on his own account, one half-farthing?
Let him come now, let him try; no one will receive him in his house.
But I say more; I accuse you of having received forty millions of sesterces contrary to law; and I deny that you have ever accounted for one farthing of that money; but when money was paid for your decrees, for your orders, for your decisions, the point to be inquired into was not into whose hand it was paid, but by whose oppression it was extorted.
Those chosen companions of yours were your hands; the prefects, the secretaries, the surgeons, the attendants the soothsayers, the criers, were your hands. The more each individual was connected with you by any relationship, or affinity, or intimacy, the more he was considered one of your bands. The whole of that retinue of yours, which caused more evil to Sicily than a hundred troops of fugitive slaves would have caused, was beyond all question your hand.
Whatever was taken by any one of these men, that must be considered not only as having been given to you, but as having been paid into your own hand.
For if you, O judges, admit this defence, "He did not receive it himself," you will put an end to all judicial proceedings for extortion.
For no criminal will be brought before you so guilty as not to be able to avail himself of that plea?
Indeed, since Verres uses it, what criminal will ever henceforward be found so abandoned as not to be thought equal to Quintus Lucius in innocence by comparison with that man?
And even now those who say this do not appear to me to be defending Verres so much as trying, in the instance of Verres, what license of defence will be admitted in other cases.
And with reference to this matter, you, O judges, ought to take great care what you do.
It concerns the chief interests of the republic, and the reputation of our order, and the safety of the allies.
For if we wish to be thought innocent, we must not only show that we ourselves are moderate, but that our companions are so too.
First of all, we must take care to take those men with us who with regard our credit and our safety.
Secondly, if in the selection of men our hopes have deceived us through friendship for the persons, we must take care to punish them, to dismiss them.
We must always live as if we expected to have to give an account of what we have been doing.
This is what was said by Africanus, a most kind-hearted man, (but that kind-heartedness alone is really admirable which is exercised without any risk to a man's reputation, as it was by him,) when an old follower of his, who reckoned himself one of his friends, could not prevail on him to take him with him into Africa as his prefect, and was much annoyed at it.
Do not marvel, said he, "that you do not obtain this from me,
for I have been a long time begging a man to whom I believe my reputation to be dear, to go with me as my prefect, and as yet I cannot prevail upon him.
" And in truth there is much more reason to beg men to go with us as our officers into a province, if we wish to preserve our safety and our honour, than to give men office as a favour to them;
but as for you, when you were inviting your friends into the province, as to a place for plunder, and were robbing in company with them, and by means of them, and were presenting them in the public assembly with golden rings, did it never occur to you that you should have to give an account, not only of yourself, but of their actions also?	-"
When he had acquired for himself these great and abundant gains from these causes which he had determined to examine into himself with his council that is, with this retinue of his then he invented an infinite number of expedients for getting bold of a countless amount of money.
No one doubts that all the wealth of every man is placed in the power of those men who allow trials to proceed, and of those who sit as judges at the trials,
no one doubts that none of us can retain possession of his house, of his farm, or of his paternal property, if, when these are claimed by any one of you, a rascally praetor, whose judgments no one has the power of arresting, can assign any judge whom he chooses, and if the worthless and corrupt judge gives any sentence which the praetor bids him give.
But if this also be added, that the praetor assigns the trial to take place according to such a formula, that even Lucius Octavius Balbus, if he were judge, (a man of the greatest experience in all that belongs to the law and to the duties of a judge,) could not decide otherwise: suppose it ran in this way:
"Let Lucius Octavius be the judge; if it appears that the farm at Capena, which is in dispute, belongs, according to the law of the Roman people, to Publius Servilius, that farm must be restored to Quintus Catulus,"
will not Lucius Octavius be bound, as judge, to compel Publius Servilius to restore the farm to Quintus Catulus, or to condemn him whom he ought not to condemn?
The whole praetorian law was like that; the whole course of judicial proceedings in Sicily was like that for three years, while Verres was praetor.
His decrees were like this: "If he does not accept what you say that you owe, accuse him; if he claims anything, take him to prison."
He ordered Caius Fuficius, who claimed something, to be taken to prison; so he did Lucius Suetius and Lucius Rucilius.
His tribunals he formed in this way: those who were Roman citizens were to be judges, when Sicilians ought to have been, according to their laws, those who were Sicilians were to be judges, when Romans should have been.
But that you may understand his whole system of judicial proceedings, listen first to the laws of the Sicilians in such uses, and then to the practices this man established.
The Sicilians have this law, that if a citizen of any town has a dispute with a fellow-citizen, he is to decide it in his own town, according to the laws there existing; if a Sicilian has a dispute with a Sicilian of a different city, in that case the praetor is to assign judges of that dispute, according to the law of Publius Rupilius, which be enacted by the advice of ten commissioners appointed to consider the subject, and which the Sicilians call the Rupilian law.
If an individual makes a claim in a community, or a community on an individual, the senate of some third city is assigned to furnish the judges, as the citizens of the cities interested in the litigation are rejected as judges in such a case.
If a Roman citizen makes a claim on a Sicilian, a Sicilian judge is assigned; if a Sicilian makes a claim on a Roman citizen, a Roman citizen is assigned as judge: in all other matters judges are appointed selected from the body of Roman citizens dwelling in the place.
In law-suits between the farmers and the tax collectors, trials are regulated by the law about corn, which they call Lex Hieronica.
All these rights were not only thrown into disorder while that man was praetor, but indeed were openly taken away from both the Sicilians and from the Roman citizens.
First of all, their own laws with reference to one another were disregarded. If a citizen had a dispute with another citizen, he either assigned any one as judge whom it was convenient to himself to assign, crier, soothsayer, or his own physician; or if a tribunal was established by the laws, and the parties had come before one of their fellow-citizens as the judge, that citizen was not allowed to decide without control.
For, listen to the edict issued by this man, by which edict he brought every tribunal under his own authority: "If any one had given a wrong decision, he would examine into the matter himself; when he had examined, he would punish.
" And when he did that, no one doubted that when the judge thought that some one else was doing to sit in judgment on his decision, and that he should be at the risk of his life in the matter, he would consider the inclination of the man who he expected would presently be judging in a matter affecting his down existence as a citizen.	"
Judges selected from the Roman settlers there were none; none even of the traders in the cities were proposed as judges.
The crowd of judges which I am speaking of was the retinue, not of Quintus Scaevola, (who, however, did not make practice of appointing judges from among his own followers,) but of Caius Verres.
And what sort of a retinue do you suppose it was when such a man as he was its chief?
You see announced in the edict, "If the senate gives an erroneous decision.
" I will prove that, if at any time a bench of judges was taken from the senate, that also gave its decisions, through compulsion, on his part, contrary to their own opinions."
There never was any selection of the judges by lot, according to the Rupilian law, except when he had no interest whatever in the case.
The tribunals established in the case of many disputes by the Lex Hieronica were all abolished by a single edict; no judges were appointed selected from the settlers or from the traders.
What great power he had you see; now learn how he exercised it.
Heraclius is the son of Hiero, a Syracusan; a man among the very first for nobility of family, and, before Verres came as praetor, one of the most wealthy of the Syracusans; now a very poor man, owing to no other calamity but the avarice and injustice of that man.
An inheritance of at least three millions of sesterces came to him by the will of his relation Heraclius; the house was full of silver plate exquisitely carved, of abundance of embroidered robes, and of most valuable slaves; things in which who is ignorant of the insane cupidity of that man?
The fact was a subject of common conversation, that a great fortune had come to Heraclius that Heraclius would not only be rich, but that he would be amply supplied with furniture, plate, robes and slaves.
Verres, too, hears this; and at first he tries by the tricks and maneuvers which he is so fond of, to get him to lend things to him to look at, which he means never to return.
Afterwards he takes counsel from some Syracusans; and they were relations of his, whose wives too were not believed to be entirely strangers to him, by name Cleomenes and Aeschrio.
What influence they had with him, and on what disgraceful reasons it was founded, you may understand from the rest of the accusation.
These men, as I say, give Verres advice. They tell him that the property is a fine one, which in every sort of wealth; and that Heraclius himself is a man advancing in years, and not very active; and that he has no patron on whom he has any claim, or to whom he has any access except the Marcelli;
that a condition was contained in the will in which he was mentioned as heir, that he was to erect some statues in the palaestra.
We will contrive to produce people from the palaestra to assert that they have not been erected according to the terms of the will, and to claim the inheritance, because they say that it is forfeited to the palaestra.
The idea pleased Verres.
For he foresaw that, when such an inheritance became disputed, and was claimed by process of law, it was quite impossible for him not to get some plunder out of it before it was done with.
He approves of the plan; he advises them to begin to act as speedily as possible, and to attack a man of that age, and disinclined to law-suits, with as much bluster as possible.
An action is brought in due form against Heraclius.
At first all marvel at the roguery of the accusation. After a little, of those who knew Verres, some suspected, and some clearly saw that he had cast his eyes on the inheritance.
In the mean time the day had arrived, on which he had announced in his edict that, according to established usage, and to the Rupilian law, he would assign judges at Syracuse.
He had come prepared to assign judges in this cause.
Then Heraclius points out to him that he cannot assign judges in his cause that day, because the Rupilian law said that they were not to be assigned till thirty days after the action was commenced.
The thirty days had not yet elapsed;
Heraclius hoped that, if he could avoid having them appointed that day, Quintus Arrius, whom the province was eagerly expecting, would arrive as successor to Verres before another appointment could take place.
He postponed appointing judges in all suits, and fixed the first day for appointing them that he legally could after the thirty days claimed by Heraclius in his action had elapsed.
When the day arrived, he began to pretend that he was desirous to appoint the judges.
Heraclius comes with his advocates, and claims to be allowed to have the cause between him and the men of the palaestra, that is to say, with the Syracusan people, tried by strict law.
His adversaries demand that judges be appointed to decide on that matter of those cities which were in the habit of frequenting the Syracusan courts.
Judges were appointed, whomsoever Verres chose.
Heraclius demanded, on the other hand, that judges should be appointed according to the provisions of the Rupilian law; and that no departure should be made from the established usage of their ancestors, from the authority of the senate, and from the rights of all the Sicilians.
Why need I demonstrate the licentious wickedness of that Verres, in the administration of justice?
Who of you is not aware of it, from his administration in this city?
Who ever, while he was praetor, could obtain anything by law against the will of Chelidon?
The province did not corrupt that man, as it has corrupted some; he was the same man that he had been at Rome.
When Heraclius said, what all men well knew, that there was an established form of law among the Sicilians by which causes between them were to be tried; that there was the Rupilian law, which Publius Rupilius, the consul, had enacted, with the advice of ten chosen commissioners; that every praetor and consul in Sicily had always observed this law.
He said that he should not appoint judges according to the provisions of the Rupilian law.
He appointed five judges who were most agreeable to himself.
What can you do with such a man as this?
What punishment can you find worthy of such licentiousness?
Then it was prescribed to you by law, O most wicked and most shameless man, in what way you were to appoint judges among the Sicilians;
when the authority of a general of the Roman people, when the dignity of ten commissioners, men of the highest rank, when a positive resolution of the senate was against you, in obedience to which resolution Publius Rupilius had established laws in Sicily by the advice of ten commissioners;
when, before you came as praetor every one had most strictly observed the Rupilian laws in all points, and especially in judicial matters; did you dare to consider so many solemn circumstances as nothing in comparison with your own plunder?
Did you acknowledge no law? Had you no scruple? no regard for your reputation? no fear of any judgment yourself?
Has the authority of no one of any weight with you? Was there no example which you chose to follow?
But, I was going to say, when these five judges had been appointed, by no law, according to no use, with none of the proper ceremonies, with no drawing of lots, according to his mere will, not to examine into the cause, but to give whatever decision they were commanded, on that day nothing more was done;
the parties are ordered to appear on the day following.
In the meantime Heraclius, as he sees that it is all a plot laid by the praetor against his fortune, resolves, by the advice of his friends and relations, not to appear before the court. Accordingly he flies from Syracuse that night.
Verres the next day, early in the morning, for he had got up much earlier than he ever did before, orders the judges to be summoned.
When he finds that Heraclius does not appear, he begins to insist on their condemning Heraclius in his absence.
They expostulate with him, and beg him, if he pleases, to adhere to the rule he had himself laid down, and not to compel them to decide against the absent party in favour of the party who was present, before the tenth hour.
He agrees.
In the meantime both Verres himself began to be uneasy, and his friends and counselors began also to be a good deal vexed at Heraclius' having fled.
They thought that the condemnation of an absent man, especially in a matter involving so large a sum of money, would be a far more odious measure than if he had appeared in court, and had there been condemned.
To this consideration was added the fact, that because the judges had not been appointed in accordance with the provisions of the Rupilian law, they saw that the affair would appear much more base and more iniquitous.
And so, while he endeavours to correct this error, his covetousness and dishonesty are made more evident.
For he declares that he will not use those five judges; he orders (as ought to have been done at first, according to the Rupilian law) Heraclius to be summoned, and those who had brought the action against him; he says that he is going to appoint the judges by lot, according to the Rupilian law.
That which Heraclius the day before could not obtain from him, though he begged and entreated it of him with many tears, occurred to him the next day of his own accord, and he recollected that he ought to appoint judges according to the Rupilian law.
He draws the names of three out of the urn: he commands them to condemn Heraclius in his absence. So they condemn him.
What was the meaning of that madness?
Did you think that you would never have to give an account of your actions?
Did you think that such men as these would never hear of these transactions?
Is such an inheritance to be claimed without the slightest grounds for such a claim, in order to become the plunder of the praetor?
is the name of the city to be introduced?
is the base character of a false accuser to be fixed upon an honourable state?
And not this only, but is the whole business to be conducted in such a matter that there is to be not even the least appearance of justice kept up?
For, in the name of the immortal gods, what difference does it make whether the praetor commands and by force compels any one to abandon all his property, or passed a sentence by which, without any trial, he must lose all his fortune?
In truth you cannot deny that you ought to have appointed judges according to the provisions of the Rupilian law, especially when Heraclius demanded it.
If you say that you departed from the law with the consent of Heraclius, you will entangle yourself, you will be hampered by the statement you make in your own defence.
For if that was the case, why, in the first place, did he refuse to appear, when he might have had the judges chosen from the proper body which he demanded?
Secondly, why, after his flight, did you appoint other judges by drawing lots, if you had appointed those who had been before appointed, with the consent of each party?
Thirdly, Marcus Postumius, the quaestor, appointed as the other judges in the market-place; you appointed the judges in this case alone.
However, by these means, some one will say, he gave that inheritance to the Syracusan people.
In the first place, even if I were disposed to grant that, still you must condemn him; for it is not permitted to us with impunity to rob one man for the purpose of giving to another.
But you will find that he despoiled that inheritance himself without making much secret of his proceedings;
that the Syracusan people, indeed, had a great deal of the odium, a great deal of the infamy, but that another had the profit; that a few Syracusans, those who now say that they have come in obedience to the public command of their city, to bear testimony in his favour, were then sharers in the plunder, and are come hither now, not for the purpose of speaking in his favour, but to assist in the valuation of the damages which they claim from him.
After he was condemned in his absence, possession is given to the palaestra of the Syracusans, that is, to the Syracusan people, not only of that inheritance which was in question, and which was of the value of three millions of sesterces, but also of all Heraclius's own paternal property, which was of equal amount.
What sort of a partnership in that of yours?
You take away a man's inheritance, which had come to him from a relation, had come by will, had come in accordance with the laws; all which property, he, who made the will, had made over to this Heraclius to have and to use as he would, some time before he died, of which inheritance, as he had died some time before you became praetor, there had been no dispute, nor had any one made any mention of it.
However, be it so;
take away inheritances from relations, give them to people at the palaestra; plunder other people's property in the name of the state; overturn laws, wills, the wishes of the dead, the rights of the living: had you any right to deprive Heraclius of his paternal property also?
And yet as soon as he fled, how shamelessly, how undisguisedly, how cruelly, O ye immortal gods, was his property seized!
How disastrous did that business seem to Heraclius, how profitable to Verres, how disgraceful to the Syracusans, how miserable to everybody!
For the first measures which are taken are to carry whatever chased plate there was among that property to Verres: as for all Corinthian vessels, all embroidered robes, no one doubted that they would be taken and seized, and carried inevitably to his house, not only out of that house, but out of every house in the whole province.
He took away whatever slaves he pleased, others he distributed to his friends: an auction was held, in which his invincible train was supreme everywhere.
But this is remarkable.
The Syracusans who presided over what was called the collection of this property of Heraclius, but what was in reality the division of it, gave in to the senate their accounts of the whole business; they said that many pairs of goblets many silver water-ewers, much valuable embroidered cloth, and many valuable slaves, had been presented to Verres; they stated how much money had been given to each person by his order.
The Syracusans groaned, but still they bore it.
Suddenly this item is read, that two hundred and fifty thousand sesterces were given to one person by command of the praetor.
A great outcry arises from every one, not only from every virtuous man, nor from those to whom it had always seemed scandalous that the goods of a private individual should be taken from him, by the greatest injustice, under the name of being claimed by the people, but even the very chief instigators of the wrong; and in some degree the partner in the rapine and plunder, began to cry out that the man ought to have his inheritance for himself.
So great an uproar arise in the senate-house, that the people ran to see what had happened.
The matter being known to the whole assembly, is soon reported at Verres's house.
The man was in a rage with those who had read out the accounts, an enemy to all who had raised the outcry; he was in fury with rage and passion.
But he was at that moment unlike himself.
You know the appearance of the man, you know his audacity; yet at that moment he was much disquieted by the reports circulated among the people, by their outcry, and by the impossibility of concealing the robbery of so large a sum of money.
When he came to himself, he summoned the Syracusans to him, because he could not deny that money had been given him by them; he did not go to a distance to look for some one, (in which case he would not have been able to prove it,) but he took one of his nearest relations, a sort of second son, and accused him of having stolen the money.
He declared that he would make him refund it;
and he, after he heard that, had a proper regard for his dignity, for his age, and for his noble birth.
He addressed the senate on the subject; he declared to them that he had nothing to do with the business Of Verres he said what all saw to be true, and he said it plainly enough.
Therefore, the Syracusans afterwards erected him a statue; and he himself, as soon as he could, left Verres, and departed from the province.
And yet they say that this man complains sometimes of his misery in being weighed down, not by his own offences and crimes, but by those of his friends.
You had the province for three years; your son-in-law elect, a young man, was with you one year. Your companions, gallant men, who were your lieutenants, left you the first year. One lieutenant, Publius Tadius, who remained, was not much with you; but if he had been always with you, he would with the greatest care have spared your reputation, and still more would he have spared his own.
What presence have you for accusing others?
What reason have you for thinking that you can, I will not say, shift the blame of your actions on another, but that you can divide it with another?
That two hundred and fifty thousand sesterces are refunded to the Syracusans, and how they afterwards returned to him by the backdoor, I will make evident to you, O judges, by documents and by witnesses.
And akin to this iniquity and rascality of that fellow, by which plunder, consisting of a part of that property, came to many of the Syracusans against the will of the people and senate of Syracuse, are those crimes which were committed by the instrumentality of Theomnastus, and Aeschrio, and Dionysodorus, and Cleomenes, utterly against the wish of the city;
first of all in plundering the whole city, of which matter I have arranged to speak in another part of my accusation, so that, by the assistance of those men whom I have named, he carried off all the statues, all the works in ivory out of the sacred temples, all the paintings from every place, and even whatever images of the gods he fancied; secondly, that in the senate-house of the Syracusans, which they call , a most honourable place, and of the highest reputation in the eyes of the citizens, where there is a brazen statue of Marcus Marcellus himself, (who preserved and restored that place to the Syracusans, though by the laws of war and victory he might have taken it away,) those men erected a gilt statue to him and another to his son; in order that, as long as the recollection of that man remained, the Syracusan senate might never be in the senate-house without lamentation and groaning.
By means of the same partners in his injuries, and thefts, and bribes, during his command the festival of Marcellus at Syracuse is abolished, to the great grief of the city; a festival which they both gladly paid as due to the recent services done them by Caius Marcellus, and also most gladly gave to the family and name and race of the Marcelli.
Mithridates in Asia, when he had occupied the whole of that province, did not abolish the festival of Mucius.
An enemy, and he too an enemy in other respects, only too savage and barbarous, still would not violate the honour of a name which had been consecrated by holy ceremonies. You forbade the Syracusans to grant one day of festival to the Marcelli, to whom they owed the being able to celebrate other days of festival.
Oh, but you gave them a splendid day instead of it; you allowed them to celebrate a festival in honour of Verres, and issued contracts for providing all that would be necessary for sacrifices and banquets on that day for many years.
But in such an enormous superfluity of impudence as that man's, it seems better to pass over some things, that we may not appear to strain every point, that we may not appear to have no feelings but those of indignation.
For time, voice, lungs, would fail me, if I wished now to cry out how miserable and scandalous it is, that there should be a festive day in his name among those people, who think themselves utterly ruined by that man's conduct.
O splendid Verrine festival!
whither have you gone that you have not brought the people cause to remember that day?
In truth, what house, what city, what temple even have you ever approached without leaving it emptied and ruined.
Let the festival, then, be fitly called Verrine, and appear to be established, not from recollection of your name, but of your covetousness and your natural disposition.
See, O judges, how easily injustice, and the habit of doing wrong creeps on; see how difficult it is to check.
There is a town called Bidis, an insignificant one indeed, not far from Syracuse.
By far the first man of that city is a man of the name of Epicrates.
An inheritance of five hundred thousand sesterces had come to him from some woman who was a relation of his, and so near a relation, that even if she had died intestate, Epicrates must have been her heir according to the laws of Bidis.
The transaction at Syracuse which I have just mentioned was fresh in men's memories, the affair I mean of Heraclius the Syracusan, who would not have lost his property if an inheritance had not come to him.
To this Epicrates too an inheritance had come, as I have said.
His enemies began to consider that he too might be easily turned out of his property by the same praetor as Heraclius had been stripped of his by; they plan the affair secretly; they suggest it to Verres by his emissaries.
The cause is arranged, so that the people belonging to the palaestra at Bidis are to claim his inheritance from Epicrates, just as the men of the Syracusan palaestra had claimed his from Heraclius.
You never saw a praetor so devoted to the interests of the palaestra. But he defended the men of the palaestra in such a way that he himself came off with his wheels all the better greased.
In this instance Verres, as soon as he foresaw what would happen, ordered eighty thousand sesterces to be paid to one of his friends.
The matter could not be kept entirely secret. Epicrates is informed of it by one of those who were concerned in it.
At first he began to disregard and despise it, because the claim made against him had actually nothing in it about which a doubt could be raised.
Afterwards when he thought of Heraclius, and recollected the licentiousness of Verres, he thought it better to depart secretly from the province.
He did so; he went to Rhegium.
And when this was known, they began to fret who had paid the money.
They thought that nothing could be done in the absence of Epicrates.
For Heraclius indeed had been present when the judges were appointed; but in the case of this man, who had departed before any steps had been taken in the action, before indeed there had been any open mention made of the dispute, they thought that nothing could be done.
The men go to Rhegium; they go to Epicrates; they point out to him, what indeed he knew, that they had paid eighty thousand sesterces; they beg him to make up to them the money they themselves were out of pocket; they tell him he may take any security from them that he likes, that none of them will go to law with Epicrates about that inheritance.
Epicrates reproaches the men at great length and with great severity, and dismisses them.
They return from Rhegium to Syracuse; they complain to many people, as men in such a case are apt to do, that they have paid eighty thousand sesterces for nothing.
The affair got abroad; it began to be the topic of every one's conversation.
Verres repeats his old Syracusan trick.
He says he wants to examine into that affair of the eighty thousand sesterces.
He summons many people before him.
The men of Bidis say that they gave it to Volcatius; they do not add that they had done so by his command.
He summons Volcatius; he orders the money to be refunded.
Volcatius with great equanimity brings the money, like a man who was sure to lose nothing by it; he returns it to them in the sight of many people; the men of Bidis carry the money away.
Some one will say, "What fault then do you find with Verres in this, who not only is not a thief himself, but who did not even allow any one else to be one?"
Listen a moment.
Now you shall see that this money which was just now seen to leave his house by the main road returned back again by a by-path.
What came next? Ought not the praetor, having inquired into the case with the bench of judges, when he had found out that a companion of his own, with the object of corruptly swaying the law, the sentence, and the bench, (a matter in which the reputation of the praetor and even his condition as a free citizen were at stake,) had received money, and that the men of Bidis had given it, doing injury to the fair fame and fortune of the praetor,
ought he not, I say, to have punished both him who had taken the money, and those who had given it?
You who had determined to punish those who had given an erroneous decision, which is often done out of ignorance, do you permit men to escape with impunity who thought that money might be received or be paid for the purpose of influencing your decree, your judicial decision?
And yet that same Volcatius remained with you, although he was a Roman knight, after he had such disgrace put upon him.
For what is more disgraceful for a well-born man what more unworthy of a free man, than to be compelled by the magistrate before a numerous assembly to restore what has been stolen;
and if he had been of the disposition of which not only a Roman knight, but every free man ought to be, he would not have been able after that to look you in the face.
He would have been a foe, an enemy, after he had been subjected to such an insult; unless, indeed, it had been done through collusion with you, and he had been serving your reputation rather than his own.
And how great a friend he not only was to you then as long as he was with you in the province, but how great a friend he is even now, when you have long since been deserted by all the rest, you know yourself, and we can conceive.
But is this the only argument that nothing was done without his knowledge, that Volcatius was not offended with him?
that he punished neither Volcatius nor the men of Bidis?
It is a great proof, but this is the greatest proof of all, that to those very men of Bidis, with whom he ought to have been angry, as being the men by whom he found out that his decree had been attempted to be influenced by bribes, because they could do nothing against Epicrates according to law, even if he were present,
to these very men, I say, he not only gave that inheritance which had come to Epicrates, but, as in the case of Heraclius of Syracuse, so too in this case, (which was even rather more atrocious than the other, because Epicrates had actually never had any action brought against him at all,) he gave them all his paternal property and fortune.
For he showed that if any one made a demand of any thing from an absent person, he would hear the cause, though without any precedent for so doing.
The men of Bidis appear they claim the inheritance.
The agents of Epicrates demand that he would either refer them to their own laws, or else appoint judges, in accordance with the provisions of the Rupilian law.
The adversaries did not dare to say anything against this; no escape from it could be devised.
They accuse the man of having fled for the purpose of cheating them.
They demand to be allowed to take possession of his property.
Epicrates did not owe a farthing to any one.
His friends said that, if any one claimed anything from him, they would stand the trial themselves, and that they would give security to satisfy the judgment.
When the whole business was getting cool, by Verres's instigation they began to accuse Epicrates of having tampered with the public documents; a suspicion from which he was far removed. They demand a trial on that charge.
His friends began to object that no new proceeding, that no trial affecting his rank and reputation, ought to be instituted while he was absent; and at the same time they did not cease to reiterate their demands that Verres should refer them to their own laws.
He, having now got ample room for false accusation, when he sees that there is any point on which his friends refused to appear for Epicrates in his absence, declares that he will appoint a trial on that charge before any other.
When all saw plainly that not only that money which had (to make a presence) been sent from his house, had returned back to it, but that he had afterwards received much more money, the friends of Epicrates ceased to argue in his defence. Verres ordered the men of Bidis to take possession of all his property, and to keep it for themselves.
Besides the five hundred thousand sesterces which the inheritance amounted to, his own previous fortune amounted to fifteen hundred thousand.
Was the affair planned out in this way from the beginning? Was it completed in this way? Is it a very trifling sum of money? Is Verres such a man as to be likely to have done all this which I have related for nothing?
Now, O judges, hear a little about the misery of the Sicilians.
Both Heraclius the Syracusan, and Epicrates of Bidis, being stripped of all their property, came to Rome. They lived at Rome nearly two years in mourning attire, with unshaven beard and hair.
When Lucius Metellus went to the province, then they also go back with Metellus, bearing with them letters of high recommendation.
As soon as Metellus came to Syracuse he rescinded both the sentences the sentence in the case of Epicrates, and that against Heraclius.
In the property of both of them there was nothing which could be restored, except what was not able to be moved from its place.
 Metellus had acted admirably on his first arrival, in rescinding and making of no effect all the unjust acts of that man which he could rescind.
He had ordered Heraclius to be restored to his property; he was not restored. Every Syracusan senator who was accused by Heraclius he ordered to be imprisoned.
And on this ground many were imprisoned.
Epicrates was restored at once.
Other sentences which had been pronounced at Lilybaeum, at Agrigentum, and at Panormus, were reviewed and reformed.
Metellus showed that he did not mean to attend to the returns which had been made while Verres was praetor.
The tithes which he had sold in a manner contrary to the Lex Hieronica, he said that he would sell according to that law.
All the actions of Metellus went to the same point, so that he seemed to be remodeling the whole of Verres's praetorship.
As soon as I arrived in Sicily, he changed his conduct.
A man of the name of Letilius had come to him two days before, a man not unversed in literature, so he constantly used him as his secretary.
He had brought him many letters, and, among them, one from home which had changed the whole man.
On a sudden he began to say that he wished to do everything to please Verres; that he was connected with him by the ties of both friendship and relationship.
All men wondered that this should now at last have occurred to him, after he had injured him by so many actions and so many decisions.
Some thought that Letilius had come as an ambassador from Verres, to put him in mind of their mutual interests, their friendship, and their relationship.
From that time he began to solicit the cities for testimony in favour of Verres, and not only to try to deter the witnesses against him by threats, but even to detain them by force.
And if I had not by my arrival checked his endeavours in some degree, and striven among the Sicilians, by the help of Glabrio's letters and of the law, I should not have been able to bring so many witnesses into this court.
Heraclius, whom I have mentioned, and Epicrates came forward a great distance to meet me, with all their friends.
When I came to Syracuse, they thanked me with tears; they wished to leave Syracuse, and go to Rome in my company:
because I had many other towns left which I wanted to go to, I arranged with the men on what day they were to meet me at Messana.
They sent a messenger to me there, that they were detained by the praetor.
And though I summoned them formally to attend and give evidence, though I gave in their names to Metellus, though they were very eager to come, having been treated with the most enormous injustice, they have not arrived yet.
These are the rights which the allies enjoy now, not to be allowed even to complain of their distresses.
You have already heard the evidence of Heraclius of Centuripa, a most virtuous and noble young man, from whom a hundred thousand sesterces were claimed by a fraudulent and false accusation.
Verres, by means of penalties and securities exacted, contrived to extort three hundred thousand; and the sentence which had been given in favour of Heraclius, in the affairs about which security had been given) he set aside, because a citizen of Centuripa had acted as judge between two of his fellow-citizens, and he said that he had given a false decision;
he forbade him to appear in the senate, and deprived him by an interdict of all the privileges of citizens and of access to all public places.
If any one struck him, he announced that he would take no cognisance of the injury; that if any claim were made on him, he would appoint a judge from his own retinue, but that he would not allow him an action on any ground whatever.
And his authority in the province had just this weight, that no one did strike him, though the praetor in his province gave every one leave by word, and in reality incited them to do so; nor did any one claim anything of him, though he had given licence to false accusation by his authority; yet that heavy mark of ignominy was attached to the man as long as Verres remained in the province.
After this fear had been impressed on the judges, in a manner unexampled and wholly without precedent, do you suppose that any matter was decided in Sicily except according to his will and pleasure?
Does this appear to have been the only effect of it, (which effect, however, it had,) to take his money from Heraclius?
or was not this also the object, as the means by which the greatest plunder was to be got, to bring, under presence of judicial decision, the property and fortune of every one into the power of that one man?
But why should I seek out every separate transaction and cause in the trials which took place on capital charges?
Out of many, which are all nearly alike, I will select those which seem to go beyond all the others in rascality.
There was a man of Halicya, named Sopater, among the first men of his state for riches and high character.
He, having been accused by his enemies before Caius Sacerdos the praetor, on a capital charge, was easily acquitted.
The same enemies again accused this same Sopater on the same charge before Caius Verres when he had come as successor to Sacerdos.
The matter appeared trifling to Sopater, both because he was innocent, and because he thought that Verres would never dare to overturn the decision of Sacerdos.
The defendant is cited to appear. The cause is heard at Syracuse.
Those changes are brought forward by the accusers which had been already previously extinguished, not only by the defence, but also by the decision.
Quintus Minucius, a Roman knight, among the first for a high and honourable reputation, and not unknown to you, O judges, defended the cause of Sopater.
There was nothing in the cause which seemed possible to be feared, or even to be doubted about at all.
In the meantime that same Timarchides, that fellow's attendant and freedman, who is, as you have learnt by many witnesses at the former hearing, his agent and manager in all affairs of this sort, comes to Sopater, and advised him not to trust too much to the decision of Sacerdos and the justice of his cause;
he tells him that his accusers and enemies have thoughts of giving money to the praetor, but that the praetor would rather take it to acquit; and at the same time, that he had rather, if it were possible, not rescind a decision of his predecessor.
Sopater, as this happened to him quite suddenly and unexpectedly, was greatly perplexed, and had no answer ready to make to Timarchides, except that he would consider what he had best do in such a case; and at the same time he told him that he was in great difficulties respecting money matters.
Afterwards he consulted with his friends; and as they advised him to purchase an acquittal, he came to Timarchides.
Having explained his difficulties to him, he brings the man down to eighty thousand sesterces, and pays him that money.
 When the cause came to be heard, all who were defending Sopater were without any fear or any anxiety.
No crime had been committed; the matter had been decided; Verres had received the money. Who could doubt how it would turn out?
The matter is not summed up that day; the court breaks up;
Timarchides comes a second time to Sopater.
He says that his accusers were promising a much larger sum to the praetor than what he had given, and that if he were wise he would consider what he had best do.
The man, though he was a Sicilian, and a defendant that is to say, though he had little chance of obtaining justice and was in an unfortunate position, still would not bear with or listen to Timarchides any longer.
Do, said he, whatever you please; I will not give any more
And this, too, was the advice of his friends and defenders; and so much the more, because Verres, however he might conduct himself on the trial, still had with him on the bench some honourable men of the Syracusan community, who had also been on the bench with Sacerdos when this same Sopater had been acquitted.
They considered that it was absolutely impossible for the same men, who had formerly acquitted Sopater, to condemn him now on the same charge, supported by the same witnesses.
And so with this one hope they came before the court.
And when they came thither, when the same men came in numbers on the bench who were used to sit there, and when the whole defence of Sopater rested on this hope, namely, on the number and dignity of the bench of judges, and on the fact of their being, as I have said before, the same men who had before acquitted Sopater of the same charge, mark the open rascality and audacity of the man, not attempted to be disguised, I will not say under any reason, but with even the least dissimulation.
He orders Marcus Petilius, a Roman knight, whom he had with him on the bench, to attend to a private cause in which he was judge.
Petilius refused, because Verres himself was detaining his friends whom he had wished to have with him on the bench.
He, liberal man, said that he did not wish to detain any of the men who preferred being with Petilius.
And so they all go; for the rest also prevail upon him not to detain them, saying that they wished to appear in favour of one or other of the parties who were concerned in that trial.
And so he is left alone with his most worthless retinue.
Minucius, who was defending Sopater, did not doubt that Verres, since he had dismissed the whole bench, would not proceed with the investigation of his cause that day; when all of a sudden he is ordered to state his case.
He answers, "To whom?"
To me, he says, "if I appear to you of sufficient dignity to try the cause of a Sicilian, a Greek.
 Certainly," says he, "you are of sufficient dignity, but I wish for the presence of those men who were present before, and were acquainted with the case. "
State your case, says he; "they cannot be present.
 For in truth," says Quintus Minucius, "Petilius begged me also to be with him on the bench;" and at the same time he began to leave his seat as counsel.
That man, in a rage, attacks him with pretty violent language, and even began to threaten him severely, for bringing such a charge, and trying to excite such odium against him.
Minucius, who lived as a merchant at Syracuse, in such a way as always to bear in mind his rights and his dignity and who knew that it became him not to increase his property in the province at the expense of any portion of his liberty, gave the man such answer as seemed good to him, and as the occasion and the cause required. He said that he would not speak in defence of his client when the bench of judges was sent away and dismissed.
And so he left the bar.
And all the other friends and advocates of Sopater, except the Sicilians, did the same.
Verres, though he is a man of incredible effrontery and audacity, yet when he was thus suddenly left alone got frightened and agitated.
He did not know what to do, or which way to turn.
If he adjourned the investigation at that time, he knew that when those men were present, whom he had got rid of for the time, Sopater would be acquitted; but if he condemned an unfortunate and innocent man, (while he himself, the praetor, was without any colleagues, and the defendant without any counsel or patron,) and rescinded the decision of Caius Sacerdos, he thought that he should not be able to withstand the unpopularity of such an act. So he was quite in a fever with perplexity.
He turned himself every way, not only as to his mind, but also as to his body; so that all who were present could plainly see that fear and covetousness were contending together in his heart.
There was a great crowd of people present, there was profound silence, and eager expectation which way his covetousness was going to find vent. His attendant Timarchides was constantly stooping down to his ear.
Then at last he said, "Come, state your case.
He orders the witnesses to be summoned instantly.
One or two of them give their evidence briefly.
No questions are asked.
The crier proclaims that the case is closed.
Verres, as if he were afraid that Petilius, having either finished or adjourned the private cause on which he was engaged, might return to the bench with the rest, jumps down in haste from his seat; he condemned an innocent man, one who had been acquitted by Caius Sacerdos, without hearing him in his defence, by the joint sentence of a secretary, a physician, and a soothsayer. Keep, pray keep that man in the city, O judges.
Spare him and preserve him, that you may have a man to assist you in judging causes; to declare his opinion in the senate on questions of war and peace, without any covetous desires.
Although, indeed, we and the Roman people have less cause to be anxious as to what his opinion in the senate is likely to be:
for what will be his authority?
When will he have either the daring or the power to deliver his opinion?
When will a man of such luxury and such indolence ever attempt to mount up to the senate-house except in the month of February?
However, let him come; let him vote war against the Cretans, liberty to the Byzantines; let him call Ptolemy king; let him say and think everything which Hortensius wishes him. These things do not so immediately concern us have not such immediate reference to the risk of our lives, or to the peril of our fortunes.
 What really is of vital importance, what is formidable, what is to be dreaded by every virtuous man, is, that if through any influence this man escapes from this trial, he must be among the judges; he must give his decision on the lives of Roman citizens; he must be standard-bearer in the army of that man who wishes to possess undisputed sway over our courts of justice.
This the Roman people refuses; this it will never endure; the whole people raises an outcry, and gives you leave, if you are delighted with these men, if you wish from such a set to add splendour to your order, and an ornament to the senate-house, to have that fellow among you as a senator, to have him even as a judge in your own cases, if you choose;
but men who are not of your body, men to whom the admirable Cornelian laws do not give the power of objecting to more than three judges, do not choose that this man, so cruel, so wicked, so infamous should sit as judge in matters in which they are concerned.
In truth, if that is a wicked action, (which appears to me to be of all actions the most base, and the most wicked,) to take money to influence a decision in a court of law, to put up one's good faith and religion to auction; how much love wicked, flagitious, and scandalous is it, to condemn a man from whom you have taken money to acquit him? so that the praetor does not even act up to the customs of robbers, for there is honour among thieves.
It is a sin to take money from a defendant; how much more to take it from an accuser! how much more wicked still to take it from both parties!
When you had put up your good faith to auction in the province, he had the most weight with you who gave you the most money.
That was natural: perhaps some time or other some one else may have done something of the same sort.
But when you had already disposed of your good faith and of your scruples to the one party, and had received the money, and had afterwards sold the very same articles to his adversary for a still higher price, are you going to cheat both, and to decide as you please?
and not even to give back the money to the party whom you have deceived?
What is the use of speaking to me of Bulbus, of Stalenus?
What monster of this sort, what prodigy of wickedness have we ever heard of or seen, who would first sell his decision to the defendant, and afterwards decide in favour of the accuser?
who would get rid of, and dismiss from the bench honourable men who were acquainted with the cause; would by himself alone condemn a defendant, who had been acquitted once from whom he had taken money, and would not restore him his money?
Shall we have this man on the list of judges?
Shall he be named as judge in the second senatorial decury?
Shall he be the Judge of the lives of free men?
Shall a judicial tablet be entrusted to him?
which he will mark not only with wax, but with blood too if it be made worth his while?
For what of all these things does he deny having done?
That, perhaps, which he must deny or else be silent, the having taken the money?
Why should he not deny it?
But the Roman knight who defended Sopater, who was present at all his deliberations and at every transaction, Quintus Minucius, says on his oath that the money was paid; he says on his oath that Timarchides said that a greater sum was being offered by the accusers. All the Sicilians will say the same; all the citizens of Halicya will say the same; even the young son of Sopater will say the same, who by that most cruel man has been deprived of his innocent father and of his father's property.
But if I cannot make the case plain, as far as the money is concerned, by evidence, can you deny this, or will you now deny, that after you had dismissed the rest of the judges, after those excellent men who had sat on the bench with Caius Sacerdos, and who were used to sit there with you, had been got rid of, you by yourself decided a matter which had been decided before?
that the man, whom Caius Sacerdos, assisted by a bench of colleagues, after an investigation of the case, acquitted, you, without any bench of colleagues, without investigating the case, condemned?
When you have confessed this, which was done openly in the forum at Syracuse, before the eyes of the whole province; then deny, if you like, that you received money.
You will be very likely to find a man, when he sees these things which were done openly, to ask what you did secretly; or to doubt whether he had better believe my witnesses or your defenders.
I have already said, O judges, that I shall not enumerate all that fellow's actions which are of this sort; but that I shall select those which are the most remarkable.
Listen now to another remarkable exploit of his, one that has already been mentioned in many places, and one of such a sort that every possible crime seems to be comprehended in that one.
Listen carefully, for you will find that this deed had its origin in covetousness, its growth in lust, its consummation and completeness in cruelty.
Sthenius, the man who is sitting by us, is a citizen of Thermae, long since known to many by his eminent virtue and his illustrious birth, and now known to all men by his own misfortune and the unexampled injuries he has received from that man.
Verres having often enjoyed his hospitality, and having not only stayed often with him at Thermae, but having almost dwelt with him there, took away from him out of his house everything which could in any uncommon degree delight the mind or eyes of any one.
In truth, Sthenius from his youth had collected such things as these with more than ordinary diligence; elegant furniture of brass, made at Delos and at Corinth, paintings, and even a good deal of elegantly wrought silver, as far as the wealth of a citizen of Thermae could afford.
And these things, when he was in Asia as a young man, he had collected diligently, as I said, not so much for any pleasure to himself, as for ornaments against the visits of Roman citizens, his own friends and connections, whenever he invited them.
But after Verres got them all, some by begging for then, some by demanding them, and some by boldly taking them, Sthenius bore it as well as he could, but he was affected with unavoidable indignation in his mind, at that fellow having rendered his house, which had been so beautifully furnished and decorated, naked and empty; still he told his indignation to no one.
He thought he must bear the injuries of the praetor in silence those of his guest with calmness.
Meantime that man, with that covetousness of his which was now notorious and the common talk of every one, as he took a violent fancy to some exceedingly beautiful and very ancient statues at Thermae placed in the public place, began to beg of Sthenius to promise him his countenance and to aid him in taking them away.
But Sthenius not only refused, but declared to him that it was utterly impossible that most ancient statues, memorials of Publius Africanus, should ever be taken away out of the town of the Thermitani, as long as that city and the empire of the Roman people remained uninjured.
Indeed, (that you may learn at the same time both the humanity and the justice of Publius Africanus,) the Carthaginians had formerly taken the town of Himera, one of the first towns in Sicily for renown and for beauty.
Scipio as he thought it a thing worthy of the Roman people, that, after the war was over, our allies should recover their property in consequence of our victory, took care, after Carthage had been taken, that everything which he could manage should be restored to all the Sicilians.
As Himera had been destroyed, those citizens whom the disasters of the war had spared had settled at Thermae, on the border of the same district, and not far from their ancient town. They thought that they were recovering the fortune and dignity of their fathers, when those ornaments of their ancestors were being placed in the town of Thermae.
There were many statues of brass; among them a statue of Himera herself, of marvellous beauty, made in the shape and dress of a woman, after the name of the town and of the river.
There was also a statue of the poet Stesichorus, aged, stooping, made, as men think, with the most exceeding skill, who was, indeed, a citizen of Himera, but who both was and is in the highest renown and estimation over all Greece for his genius.
These things he coveted to a degree of madness.
There is also, which I had almost passed over, a certain she-goat made, as even we who are skilled in these matters can judge, with wonderful skill and beauty.
These, and other works of art, Scipio had not thrown away like a fool, in order that an intelligent man like Verres might have an opportunity of carrying them away, but he had restored them to the people of Thermae; not that he himself had not gardens, or a suburban villa, or some place or other where he could put them; but, if he had taken them home, they would not long have been called Scipio's, but theirs to whom they had come by his death.
Now they are placed in such places that it seems to me they will always seem to be Scipio's, and so they are called.
 When that fellow claimed those things, and the subject was mooted in the senate, Sthenius resisted his claim most earnestly, and urged many arguments, for he is among the first men in all Sicily for fluency of speech.
He said that it was more honourable for the men of Thermae to abandon their city than to allow the memorials of their ancestors, the spoils of their enemies, the gifts of a most illustrious man, the proofs of the alliance and friendship with the Roman people, to be taken away out of their city.
The minds of all were moved.
No one was found who did not agree that it was better to die.
And so Verres found this town almost the only one in the whole world from which he could not carry off anything of that sort belonging to the community, either by violence, or by stealth, or by his own absolute power, or by his interest, or by bribery.
But, however, all this covetousness of his I will expose another time; at present I must return to Sthenius.
Verres being furiously enraged against Sthenius, renounces the connection of hospitality with him, leaves his house, and departs; for, indeed, he had moved his quarters before.
The greatest enemies of Sthenius immediately invite him to their houses, in order to inflame his mind against Sthenius by inventing lies and accusing him.
And these enemies were, Agathinus, a man of noble birth, and Dorotheus, who had married Callidama, the daughter of that same Agathinus, of whom Verres had heard.
So he preferred migrating to the son-in-law of Agathinus.
Only one night elapsed before he became so intimate with Dorotheus, that, as one might say, they had everything in common.
He paid as great attention to Agathinus as if he had been some connection or relation of his own.
He appeared even to despise that statue of Himera, because the figure and features of his hostess delighted him much more.
Therefore he began to instigate the men to create some danger for Sthenius, and to invent some accusation against him.
They said they had nothing to allege against him.
On this he openly declared to them, and promised to them that they might prove whatever they pleased against Sthenius if they only laid the information before him. So they do not delay.
They immediately bring Sthenius before him; they say that the public documents have been tampered with by him.
Sthenius demands, that as his own fellow-citizens are prosecuting him on a charge of tampering with the public documents, and as there is a right of action on such a charge according to the laws of the Thermitani since the senate and people of Rome had restored to the Thermitani their city, and their territory and their laws, because they had always remained faithful and friendly;
and since Publius Rupilius had afterwards, in obedience to a degree of the senate, given laws to the Sicilinus, acting with the advice of ten commissioners, according to which the citizens were to use their own laws in their actions with one another; and singe Verres himself had the same regulation contained in his edict; on all these accounts, I say, he claims of Verres to refer the matter to their own laws.
That man, the justest of all men, and the most remote from covetousness, declares that he will investigate the affair himself, and bids him come prepared to plead his cause at the eighth hour.
It was not difficult to see what that dishonest and wicked man was designing. And, indeed, he did not himself very much disguise it, and the woman could not hold her tongue.
It was understood that his intention was, that, after he, without any pleading taking place, and without any witnesses being called, had condemned Sthenius, then, infamous that he was, he should cause the man, a man of noble birth, of mature age, and his own host, to be cruelly punished by scourging.
And as this was notorious, by the advice of his friends and connections, Sthenius fled from there to Rome.
He preferred trusting himself to the winter and to the waves, rather than not escape that common tempest and calamity of all the Sicilians.
 That punctual and diligent man is ready at the eighth hour.
He orders Sthenius to be summoned;
and, when he sees that he does not appear, he begins to burn with indignation, and to go mad with rage; to despatch officers to his house; to send horsemen in every direction about his farms and country houses,
and as he kept waiting there till some certain news could be brought to him, he did not leave the court till the third hour of the night.
The next day he came down again the first thing in the morning; he calls Agathinus, he bids him make his statement about the public documents against Sthenius in his absence.
It was a cause of such a character, that, even though he had no adversary in court, and a judge unfriendly to the defendant, still he could not find anything to say.
So that he confined himself to the mere statement that, when Sacerdos was praetor, Sthenius had tampered with the public documents.
He had scarcely said this when Verres gives sentence "that Sthenius seems to have tampered with the public documents," and, moreover, this man so devoted to Venus, added this besides, with no precedent for, no example of, such an addition, "For that action he should adjudge five hundred thousand sesterces to Venus Erycina out of the property of Sthenius. "
And immediately he began to sell his property; and he would have sold it, if there had been ever so little delay in paying him the money.
After it was paid, he was not content with this iniquity; he gave notice openly from the seat of justice, and from the tribunal, "That if any one wished to accuse Sthenius in his absence of a capital charge, he was ready to take the charge. "
And immediately he began to instigate Agathinus, his new relation and host, to apply himself to such a cause, and to accuse him.
But he said loudly, in the hearing of every one, that he would not do so, and that he was not so far an enemy to Sthenius as to say that he was implicated in any capital crime.
Just at this moment a man of the name of Pacilius, a needy and worthless man, arrives on a sudden.
He says, that he is willing to accuse the man in his absence if he may.
And Verres tells him that he may, that it is a thing often done, and that he will receive the accusation.
So the charge is made.
Verres immediately issues an edict that Sthenius is to appear at Syracuse on the first of December.
He, when he had reached Rome, and had a sufficiently prosperous voyage for so unfavourable a time of year, and had found everything more just and gentle than the disposition of the praetor, his own guest, related the whole matter to his friends, and it appeared to them all cruel and scandalous, as indeed it was.
Therefore Cnaeus Lentulus and Lucius Gellius the consuls immediately propose in the senate that it be established as a law, if it so seem good to the conscript fathers, "That men be not proceeded against on capital charges in the provinces while they are absent. "
They relate to the senate the whole case of Sthenius, and the cruelty and injustice of Verres.
Verres, the father of the praetor, was present in the senate, and with tears begged all the senators to spare his son, but he had not much success.
For the inclination of the senate for the proposal of the consuls was extreme.
Therefore opinions were delivered to this effect; "that as Sthenius had been proceeded against in his absence, it seemed good to the senate that no trial should take place in the case of an absent man; and if anything had been done, it seemed good that it should not be ratified.
" On that day nothing could be done, because it was so late, and because his father had found men to waste the time in speaking.	"
Afterwards the elder Verres goes to all the defenders and connections of Sthenius; he begs and entreats them not to attack his son, not to be anxious about Sthenius; he assures them that he will take care that he suffers no injury by means of his son; that with that object he will send trustworthy men into Sicily both by sea and land.
And it wanted now about thirty days of the first of December, on which day he had ordered Sthenius to appear at Syracuse.
The friends of Sthenius are moved; they hope that by the letters and messengers of the father the Bon may be called off from his insane attempt.
The cause is not agitated any more in the senate.
Family messengers come to Verres, and bring him letters from his father before the first of December, before any steps whatever had been taken by him in Sthenius's affair; and at the same time many letters about the same business are brought to him from many of his friends and intimates.
On this he, who had never any regard either for his duty or his danger, or for affection, or for humanity, when put in competition with his covetousness, did not think, as far as he was advised, that the authority of his father, nor, as far as he was entreated, that his inclination was to be preferred to the gratification of his own evil passions. On the morning of the first of December, according to his edict, he orders Sthenius to be summoned.
If your father, at the request of any friend, whether influenced by kindness or wishing to curry favour with him, had made that petition to you, still the inclination of your father ought to have had the greatest weight with you;
but when he begged it of you for the sake of your own safety from a capital charge, and when he had sent trustworthy men from home, and when they had come to you at a time when the whole affair was still intact, could not even then a regard, if not for affection, at least for your own safety, bring you back to duty and to common sense?
He summons the defendant.
He does not answer.
He summons the accuser.
(Mark, I pray you, O judges; see how greatly fortune herself opposed that man's insanity, and see at the same time what chance aided the cause of Sthenius;) the accuser, Marcus Pacilius, being summoned, (I know not how it came about,) did not answer, did not appear.
If Sthenius had been accused while present, if he had been detected in a manifest crime, still, as his accuser did not appear, Sthenius ought not to have been condemned.
In truth, if a defendant could be condemned though his accuser did not appear, I should not have come from Vibo to Velia in a little boat through the weapons of fugitive slaves, and pirates, and through yours, at a time when all that haste of mine at the peril of my life was to prevent your being taken out of the list of defendants if I did not appear on the appointed day.
If then in this trial of yours that was the most desirable thing by you, namely, for me not to appear when I was summoned, why did you not think that it ought also to serve Sthenius that his accuser had not appeared?
He so managed the matter that the end entirely corresponded to the beginning; the same man against whom he had received an accusation while he was absent, he condemns now when the accuser is absent.
 At the very outset news was brought to him that the matter had been agitated in the senate, (which his father also had written him word of at great length,) that also in the public assembly Marcus Palicanus, a tribune of the people, had made a complaint to their of the treatment of Sthenius;
lastly, that I myself had pleaded the cause of Sthenius before this college of the tribunes of the people, as by their edict no one was allowed to remain in Rome who had been condemned on a capital charge; and that when I had explained the business as I have now done to you, and had proved that this had no right to be considered a condemnation, the tribunes of the people passed this resolution, and that it was unanimously decreed by them,
"That Sthenius did not appear to be prohibited by their edict from remaining in Rome.
" When this news was brought to him, he for a while was alarmed and agitated;
he turned the blunt end of his pen on to his tablets, and by so doing he overturned the whole of his cause. For he left himself nothing which could be defended by any means whatever.	-"
For if he were to urge in his defence, "It is lawful to take a charge against an absent man, no law forbids this being done in a province," he would seem to be putting forth a faulty and worthless defence, but still it would be some sort of a defence.
Lastly, he might employ that most desperate refuge, of saying, that he had acted ignorantly; that he had thought that it was lawful.
And although this is the worst defence of all, still he would seem to have said something.
He erases that from his tablets which he had put down, and enters "that the charge was brought against Sthenius while he was present. "
Here consider in how many toils he involved himself; from which he could never disentangle himself, judges.
In the first place, he had often and openly declared himself in Sicily from his tribunal, and had asserted to many people in private conversation, that it was lawful to take a charge against an absent man; that he, for example, had done so himself which he had.
That he was in the habit of constantly saying this, was stated at the former pleading by Sextus Pompeius Chlorus, a man of whose virtue I have before spoken highly;
and by Cnaeus Pompeius Theodorus, a man approved of by the judgment of that most illustrious man Cnaeus Pompeius in many most important affairs, and, by universal consent, a most accomplished person; and by Posides Matro of Solentum, a man of the highest rank, of the greatest reputation and virtue.
And as many as you please will tell you the same thing at this present trial, both men who have heard it from his own mouth, some of the leading men of our order, and others too who were present when the accusation was taken against Sthenius in his absence.
Moreover at Rome, when the matter was discussed in the senate, all his friends, and among them his own father, defended him on the ground of its being lawful so to act; of its having been done constantly; of his having done what he had done according to the example and established precedent of others.
Besides, all Sicily gives evidence of the fact which in the common petitions of all the states has prescribed this request to the consuls, "to beg and entreat of the conscript fathers, not to allow charges to be received against the absent.
" Concerning which matter you heard Cnaeus Lentulus, the advocate of Sicily, and a most admirable young man, say, that the Sicilians, when they were instructing him in their case, and pointing out to him what matters were to be urged in their behalf before the senate, complained much of this misfortune of Sthenius, and on account of this injustice which had been done to Sthenius, resolved to make this demand which I have mentioned."
And as this is the ease, were you endued with such insanity and audacity, as, in a matter so clear, so thoroughly proved, made so notorious even by you yourself, to dare to corrupt the public records?
But how did you corrupt them?
Did you not do it in such a way that, even if we all kept silence, still your own handwriting would be sufficient to condemn you?
Give me, it you please, the document.
Take it round to the judges; show it to them.
Do you not see that the whole of this entry, where he states that the charge was made against Sthenius in his presence, is a correction?
What was written there before?
What blunder did he correct when he made that erasure?
Why, O judges, do you wait for proofs of this charge from us?
We say nothing; the books are before you, which cry out themselves that they have been tampered with and amended.
Do you think you can possibly escape out of this business, when we are following you up, not by any uncertain opinion, but by your own traces, which you have left deeply printed and fresh in the public documents?
Has he decided, (I should like to know,) without hearing the cause, that Sthenius has tampered with the public documents, who cannot possibly defend himself from the charge of having tampered with the public documents in the case of that very Sthenius?
See now another instance of madness; see how, in trying to acquit himself; he entangles himself still more.
He assigns an advocate to Sthenius. Whom?
Any relation or intimate friend?
No.
Any citizen, any honourable and noble man of Florence?
Not even that.
At least it was some Sicilian, in whom there was some credit and dignity?
Far from it.
Whom then did he assign to him?
A Roman citizen.
Who can approve of this?
When Sthenius was the man of the highest rank in his city, a man of most extensive connections, with numberless friends; when, besides, he was of the greatest influence all over Sicily, by his own personal character and popularity; could he find no Sicilian who was willing to be appointed his advocate?
Will you approve of this?
Did he himself prefer a Roman citizen?
Tell me what Sicilian, when he was defendant in any action, ever had a Roman citizen assigned to him as his advocate?
Produce the records of all the praetors who preceded Verres; open them.
If you find one such instance, I will then admit to you that this was done as you have entered it in your public documents.
Oh but, I suppose, Sthenius thought it honourable to himself for Verres to choose a man for his advocate out of the number of Roman citizens who were his own friends and connections!
Whom did he choose?
Whose name is written in the records?
Caius Claudius, the son of Caius, of the Palatine tribe.
I do not ask who this Claudius is; how illustrious, how honourable, how well suited to the business, and deserving that, because of his influence and dignity, Sthenius should abandon the custom of all the Sicilians, and have a Roman citizen for his advocate.
I do not ask any of these questions; for perhaps Sthenius was influenced not by the high position of the man, but by his intimacy with him.
What?
What shall we say if there was in the whole world a greater enemy to Sthenius than this very Caius Claudius, both constantly in old times, and especially at this time and in this affair?
if he appeared against him on the charge of tampering with the public documents? if he opposed him by every means in his power?
Which shall we believe, that an enemy of Sthenius was actually appointed his advocate, or that you, at a time of the greatest danger to Sthenius, made free with the name of his enemy, to ensure his ruin?
And that no one may have any doubt as to the real nature of the whole transaction, although I feel sure that by this time that man's rascality is pretty evident to you all, still listen yet a little longer.
Do you see that man with curly hair, of a dark complexion, who is looking at us with such a countenance as shows that he seems to himself a very clever fellow?
him, I mean, who has the papers in his hand who is writing who is prompting him who is next to him.
That is Caius Claudius, who in Sicily was considered Verres's agent and interpreter, the manager of all his dirty work, a sort of colleague to Timarchides. Now he is promoted so high that he scarcely seems to yield to Apronius in intimacy with him; indeed he called himself the colleague and ally not of Timarchides, but of Verres himself.
Now doubt, if you can, that he chose that man of all the world to impose the worthless character of a false advocate on, whom he knew to be most hostile to Sthenius, and most friendly to himself.
And will you hesitate in this case, O judges, to punish such enormous audacity and cruelty and injustice as that of this man?
Will you hesitate to follow the example of those judges, who, when they had condemned Cnaeus Dolabella, rescinded the condemnation of Philodamus of Opus, because a charge had been received against him not in his absence, which is of all things the most unjust and the most intolerable, but after a commission had been given him by his fellow-citizens to proceed to Rome as their ambassador?
That precedent which the judges, in obedience to the principles of equity, established in a less important cause, will you hesitate to adopt in a cause of the greatest consequence, especially now that it has been established by the authority of others?
But who was it, O Verres, whom you treated with such great, with such unexampled injustice?
Against whom did you receive a charge in his absence?
Whom did you condemn in his absence; not only without any crime, and without any witness, but even without any accuser?
Who was it?
O ye immortal gods!
I will not say your own friend, that which is the dearest title among men.
I will not say your host, which is the most holy name.
There is nothing in Sthenius's case which I speak of less willingly.
The only thing which I find it possible to blame him in is, that he, a most moderate and upright man, invited you, a man full of adultery, and crime, and wickedness, to his house; that he, who had been and was connected by ties of hospitality with Caius Marius, with Cnaeus Pompeius, with Caius Marcellus, with Lucius Sisenna, your defender, and with other excellent citizens, added your name also to that of those unimpeachable men.
On which account I make no complaint of violated hospitality, and of your abominable wickedness in violating it; I say this not to those who know Sthenius, that is to say, not to any one of those who have been in Sicily;
(for no one who has is ignorant in how great authority he lived in his own city, in what great honour and consideration among all the Sicilians;) but I say it that those, too, who have not been in the province, may be able to understand who he was in whose case you established such a precedent, that both on account of the iniquity of the deed, as well as on account of the rank of the man, it appeared scandalous and intolerable to every one.
 Is not Sthenius the man, he who when he had very easily obtained all the honourable offices in his city, executed them with the greatest splendor, and magnificence? who decorated a town, not itself of the first rank, with most spacious places of public resort, and most splendid monuments, at his own expense?
on account of whose good services towards the state of Thermae, and towards all the Sicilians, a brazen tablet was set up in the senate-house at Thermae; in which mention was made of his services, and engraved at the public expense? which tablet was torn down under your government, and is now brought hither by me, that all may know the honour in which he was held among his countrymen, and his preeminent dignity.
Is this the man, who when he was accused before that most illustrious man, Cnaeus Pompeius, and when his enemies and accusers charged him, in terms calculated to excite odium against him, rather than true, of having been ill affected to the republic on account of his intimacy and his connections of hospitality with Caius Marius,
was acquitted by Cnaeus Pompeius with such language as showed that, from what had come out at that very trial, Cnaeus Pompeius judged him most worthy of his own intimacy?
and moreover was defended and extolled by all the Sicilians in such a manner, that Pompeius thought that by his acquittal he had earned, not only the gratitude of the man himself, but that of the whole province?
Lastly, is not he the man who had such affection towards the republic, and also such great authority among his fellow-citizens, that he alone in all Sicily, while you were praetor, did what not only no other Sicilian, but what all Sicily even could not do, namely, prevented you from taking away any statue, any ornament, any sacred vessel, or any public property from Thermae; and that too when there were many remarkable beautiful things there, and though you coveted everything?
See now, what a difference there is between you, in whose name days of festival are kept among the Sicilians, and those splendid Verrean games, are celebrated; to whom gilt statues are erected at Rome, presented by the commonwealth of Sicily, as we see inscribed upon them; see, I say, what a difference there is between you and this Sicilian, who was condemned by you, the patron of Sicily.
Him very many cities of Sicily praise by public resolutions in his favour, by their own evidence, by deputations went hither with that object.
You, the patron of all the Sicilians, the solitary state of the Mamertini, the partner of your thefts and crimes, praises publicly; and yet in such a way that, by a new process, the deputies themselves injure your cause, though the deputation praises you. These other states all publicly accuse you, complain of you, impeach you by letters, by deputations, by evidence; and, if you are acquitted, think themselves utterly ruined.
It is in the case of this man and of his property that you have erected a monument of your crimes and cruelty even on Mount Eryx itself; on which is inscribed the name Sthenius of Thermae.
I saw a Cupid made of silver, with a torch.
What object had you, what reason was there for employing the plunder of Sthenius on that subject rather than on any other?
Did you wish it to be a token of your own cupidity, or a trophy of your friendship and connection of hospitality with him, or a proof of your love towards him?
Men, who in their excelling wickedness are pleased not only with their lust and pleasure itself, but also with the fame of their wickedness, do wish to leave in many places the marks and traces of their crimes.
He was burning with love of that hostess for whose sake he had violated the laws of hospitality.
He wished that not only to be known, but also to be recorded for ever.
And therefore, out of the proceeds of that very action which he had performed, Agathinus being the accuser, he thought that a reward was especially due to Venus, who had caused the prosecution and the whole proceeding.
I should think you grateful to the Gods if you had given this gift to Venus, not out of the property of Sthenius, but out of your own, as you ought to have done, especially as an inheritance had come to you from Chelidon that very same year.
On these grounds now, even if I had not undertaken this cause at the request of all the Sicilians; if the whole province had not requested this favour of me; if my affection and love for the republic, and the injury done to the credit of our order and of the courts of justice, had not compelled me to do so; and if this had been my only reason, that you had so cruelly, and wickedly, and abominably treated my friend and connection Sthenius, to whom I had formed an extraordinary attachment in my quaestorship, of whom I had the highest possible opinion, whom while I was in the province I knew to be most zealous and earnest for my reputation, I should still think I had plenty of reason to incur the enmity of a most worthless man, in order to defend the safety and fortunes of my friend.
Many men have done the same in the times of our ancestors.
Lately, too, that most eminent man Cnaeus Domitius did so, who accused Marcus Silanus, a man of consular rank, on account of the injuries done by him to Egritomarus of the Transalpine country, his friend.
I should think it became me to follow the example of their good feeling and regard for their duty; and I should hold out hope to my friends and connections to think that they would live a safer life owing to my protection.
But when the cause of Sthenius draws along with it the common calamity of the whole province, and when many of my friends and connections are being defended by me at the same time, both in their public and private interests, I ought not in truth to fear that any one can suppose that I have done what I have in undertaking this cause under the pressure and compulsion of any motive except that of the strictest duty.
And that we may at last give up speaking of the investigations made, and the judicial proceedings conducted, and of the decisions given by that man; and as his exploits of that class are countless, let us put some bounds and limits to our speech and accusation. We will take a few cases of another sort.
You have heard Quintus Varius say, that his agents paid that man a hundred and thirty thousand sesterces for a decision in his cause.
You recollect that the evidence of Quintus Varius was corroborated, and that this whole affair was proved by the testimony of Caius Sacerdos, a most excellent man.
You know that Cnaeus Sertius and Marcus Modius, Roman knights, and that six hundred Roman citizens besides, and many Sicilians, said that they had given that money for decisions in their causes.
And why need I dilate upon this accusation when the whole matter is set plainly forth in the evidence?
Why should I argue about what no one can doubt?
Or will any man in the world doubt that he set up his judicial decisions for sale in Sicily, when at Rome he sold his very edict and all his decrees?
and that he received money from the Sicilians in issuing extraordinary decrees, when he actually made a demand on Marcus Octavius Ligur for giving a decision on his cause?
For what method of extorting money did he ever omit?
What method did he fail to devise, even if it had escaped the notice of every one else?
Was anything in the Sicilian states ever sought to be obtained in which there is any honour, any power, or any authority, that you did not make it a source of your own gain, and sell it to the best bidder?
At the former pleading evidence was given of both a public and a private nature;
deputies from Centuripa, from Halesa, from Catina, and from Panormus, and from many other cities gave evidence; but now, also, a great many private individuals have been examined,
by whose testimony you have ascertained that no one in all Sicily for the space of three years was ever made senator in any city for nothing, no one by vote, as their laws prescribe, no one except by his command, or by his letters;
and that in the appointment of all these senators, not only were no votes given, but there was not even any consideration of those families from which it was lawful to select men for that body, nor of their income, nor of their age; nor were any other of the Sicilian laws of the slightest influence.
Whoever wished to be made a senator, though he was a boy, though he was unworthy, though he was of a class from which it was not lawful to take senators;
still, if he paid money enough to appear in his eyes a fit man to gain his object, so it always was.
Not only the laws of the Sicilians had no influence in this matter, but even those which had been given to them by the senate and people of Rome had none either.
For the laws which he makes who has the supreme command given to him by the Roman people, and authority to make laws conferred on him by the senate, ought to be considered the laws of the senate and people of Rome.
The citizens of Halesa, who were till lately in the enjoyment of their own laws, in return for the numerous and great services and good deeds done both by themselves and by their ancestors to our republic, lately in the consulship of Lucius Licinius and Quintus Mucius, requested laws from our senate, as they had disputes among themselves about the elections into their senate.
The senate, by a very honourable decree, voted that Caius Claudius Pulcher, the son of Appius the praetor, should give them laws to regulate their elections into their senate.
Caius Claudius, taking as his counselors all the Marcelli who were then alive, with their advice gave laws to the men of Halesa in which he laid down many rules about the age of the men who might be elected; that no one might be under thirty years of age; about trade, that no one engaged in it might be elected; about their income, and about all other matters;
all which regulations prevailed till that man became praetor by the authority of our magistrates, and with the cordial good-will of the men of Halesa.
But from him even a crier who was desirous of it, bought that rank for a sum of money, and boys sixteen and seventeen years old purchased the title of senator; and that which the men of Halesa, our most ancient and faithful allies and friends, had petitioned, and that successfully, at Rome, to have put on such a footing that it might not be lawful for men to be elected even by vote, he now made easy to be obtained by bribery.
 The people of Agrigentum have old laws about appointing their senate, given them by Scipio, in which the same principles are laid down, and this one besides, as there are two classes of Agrigentines, one of the old inhabitants, and the other of the new, settlers whom Titus Manlius, when praetor, had led from other towns of the Sicilians to Agrigentum, in obedience to a resolution of the senate;
it was provided in the laws of Scipio, that there should not be a greater number of members of the senate taken from the class of settlers than from the old inhabitants of Agrigentum.
That man, who had levelled all laws by bribery, and who had taken away all distinction between things for money, not only disturbed all those regulations which related to age, rank, and traffic, but even with respect to these two classes of old and new inhabitants, he disturbed the proportion of their selection.
For when a senator died of the old inhabitants, and when the remaining number of each class was equal, it was necessary, according to the laws, that one of the original inhabitants should be elected in order that there might be the larger number.
And though this was the case, still, not only some of the original inhabitants, but also some of the new settlers, came to him to purchase the rank of senator.
The result is, that through bribery, one of the new men carries the day, and gets letters of appointment from the praetor.
The Agrigentines send deputies to him to inform him of their laws, and to explain to him the invariable usage of past years, in order that he might be aware that he had sold that rank to one with whom he had no right even to treat on the subject. By whose speech, as he had already received the money, he was not in the least influenced.
He did the same thing at Heraclea.
For thither also Publius Rupilius led settlers and gave them similar laws about the appointment of the senate, and about the number of the old and new senators.
There he did not only receive money, as he did in the other cities, but he even confused the class of the original inhabitants and of the new settlers. Do not wait for me to go through all the cities of Sicily in my speech. In this one statement I comprehend everything, that no one could be made a senator while he was praetor except those who had given him money.
And I carry on the same charge to all magistracies, agencies, and priesthoods; by which acts he has not only trampled on the laws of men, but on all the religious reverence due to the immortal gods.
There is at Syracuse a law respecting their religion, which enjoins a priest of Jupiter to be taken by lot every year; and that priesthood is considered among the Syracusans as the most honourable. When three men have been selected by vote out of the three classes of citizens, the matter is decided by lot.
He by his absolute command had contrived to have his intimate friend Theomnastus returned among the three by vote. When it came to the decision by lot, which he could not command, men were waiting to see what he would do.
The fellow at first forbade them to elect by lot, as that seemed the easiest way, and ordered Theomnastus to be appointed without casting lots.
The Syracusans say that cannot possibly be done, according to the reverence due to their sacred laws; they say it would be impious.
He orders the law to be read to him.
It is read.
In it was written, "that as many lots were to be thrown into the urn as there were names returned; that he whose name was drawn was to have the priesthood.
 He then, ingenious and clever man! said, Capital! it is written, 'As many lots as there are names returned;'
how many names then were returned?"
It is answered, "Three.
 Is there then anything necessary except that three lots should be put in, and one drawn out?"
"Nothing.	"
" He orders three lots to be put in, on all of which was written the name of Theomnastus.	"
A great outcry arises as it seemed to every one a scandalous and infamous proceeding.
And so by these means that most honourable priesthood is given to Theomnastus.
 At Cephalaedium there is a regular month, in which the pontifex is bound to be appointed.
A man of the name of Artemo, surnamed Climachias, was desirous of that honour a man of sufficient riches to be sure, and of noble family;
but he could not possibly have been appointed if a man of the name of Herodotus had been present.
For that place and rank was thought to be so decidedly due to him for that year, that even Climachias could say nothing against him.
The matter is referred to Verres, and is decided according to his usual fashion.
Some beautiful and valuable specimens of carving are removed from Artemo's.
Herodotus was at Rome; he thought that he should arrive in time enough for the comitia if he came the day before.
Verres, in order that the comitia might not be held in any other month than the regular one, and that the honour might not be refused to Herodotus when he was present, (a thing which he was not anxious for, and which Climachias was very eager to avoid,) contrives, (I have said before, there is no one cleverer, and never was, in his way,) he contrives, I say, how the comitia may be held in the regular month for them, and yet Herodotus may not be able to be present.
It is a custom of the Sicilians, and of the rest of the Greeks, because they wish their days and months to agree with the calculations as to the sun and moon, if there be any difference sometimes to take out a day, or, at most, two days from a month, which they call . And so also they sometimes make a month longer by a day or by two days.
And when he heard of that, he, this new astronomer, who was thinking not so much of the heavens as of the heavy plate, he orders (not a day to be taken out of the month, but) a month and a half to be taken out of the year; so that the day which, as one may say, ought to have been the thirteenth of January, became the first of March. And that is done in spite of the remonstrances and indignation of every one.
That was the legitimate day for holding the comitia.
On that day Climachias is declared to have been elected priest.
When Herodotus returns from Rome, fifteen days, as he supposed, before the comitia, he comes on the month of the comitia, when the comitia have been held thirty days before.
Then the people of Cephalaedium voted an intercalary month of forty-five days, in order that the rest of the months might fall again into their proper season.
If these things could be done at Rome, no doubt he would somehow or other have contrived to have the forty-five days between the two sets of games taken away, during which days alone this trial could take place.
 But now it is worth while to see how the censors were appointed in Sicily while that man was praetor.
For that is the magistracy among the Sicilians, the appointments to which are made by the people with the greatest care, because all the Sicilians pay a yearly tax in proportion to their incomes; and, in making the census, the power is entrusted to the censor of making every sort of valuation, and of determining the total amount of every man's contribution.
Therefore the people choose with the greatest care the man in whom they can place the greatest confidence in a matter affecting their own property; and on account of the greatness of the power, this magistracy is an object of the greatest ambition.
In such a matter, Verres did not choose to do any thing obscurely, nor to play tricks in the drawing of lots, nor to take days out of the calendar.
He did not choose to do anything in an underhand manner, or by means of artifice; but in order to take away the fondness and desire for honours and ambition out of every city, feelings which usually tend to the ruin of a state, he declared that he should appoint the censors in every city.
When the praetor announced so vast a scene of bargaining and trafficking as that, people came to Syracuse to see him, from all quarters.
The whole of the praetor's house was on fire with the eagerness and cupidity of men; and no wonder, when all the comitia of so many cities were packed together into one house, and when all the ambition of an entire province was confined in one chamber.
Bribes being openly asked for, and biddings being openly made, Timarchides appointed two censors for every city.
He, by his own labour, and by his own visits to every one, by all the trouble which he took in this employment, achieved this, that all the money came to Verres without his having any anxiety on his part.
How much money this Timarchides made, you cannot as yet know; for a certainty; but in what a variety of manners, and how shamefully, he plundered people, you heard at the former pleading, by the evidence of many witnesses.
 But that you may not wonder how that freedman obtained so much influence with him, I will tell you briefly what the man is; so that you may both see the worthlessness of the man who kept such a fellow about him, especially in that employment and position, and that you may also see the misery of the province.
In the seduction of women, and in all licentiousness and wickedness of that character, I found this Timarchides wonderfully fitted by nature to be subservient to his infamous lusts, and unexampled profligacy.
In finding out who people were, in calling on them, in addressing them, in bribing them, in doing anything in matters of that sort, however cunningly, however audaciously, however shamelessly it might be necessary to go to work, I heard that this man could contrive admirable schemes for ensuring success.
For, as for Verres himself, he was only a man of a covetousness ever open-mouthed, and ever threatening, but he had no ingenuity, no resources; so that, in whatever he did of his own accord, (just as you know was the case with him at Rome,) he seemed to rob openly rather than to cheat.
But the other fellow's skill and artifice were marvellous, so that he could hunt out and scent out with the greatest acuteness, all over the province, whatever had happened to any one, whatever any one stood in need of.
He was able to find out, to converse with, to tamper with every one's foes, and every one's enemies; to know the circumstances of every trial on both sides; to ascertain men's inclinations, and power, and resources; where it was necessary to strike terror; where it was desirable to hold out hope.
Every accuser, every informer, he had in his power, if he wished to cause trouble to any one, he did it without any difficulty. All Verres's decrees, and commands, and letters, he sold in the most skillful and cunning manner.
And he was not only the minister of Verres's pleasures, he also took equally good care of himself. He not only picked up whatever money had slipped through his principal's fingers, by which he amassed great riches, but he also picked up the relics of his pleasures and of his profligacy.
Therefore do not fancy that Athenio reigned in Sicily, for he took no city; but know ye that the runaway slave Timarchides reigned in every city of Sicily for three years; that the children, the matrons, the property, and all the fortunes of the most ancient and most devoted allies of the Roman people were all that time in the power of Timarchides.
He therefore, as I say, he, Timarchides, sent censors into every city, having taken bribes for their appointment.
Comitia for the election of censors, while Verres was praetor, were never held not even for the purpose of making a presence of legality.
This was the most shameless business of all.
Three hundred denarii were openly exacted (for this, forsooth, was permitted by the laws) from each censor, to be paid down for the praetors statue.
There were appointed a hundred and thirty censors.
They gave one sum of money for the censorship contrary to the law; these thirty-nine thousand denarii they openly paid down for the statue, in compliance with the laws.
First of all, what was all that money for?
Secondly, why did the censors pay it to you for your statue?
I suppose there is a regular order of censors, a college of them.
They are a distinct class of men! Why, it is either cities in their capacity of communities, that confer these honours, or men according to their classes, as cultivators, as merchants, as shipowners.
But why to censors rather than to aediles?
Is it for any service that they have done?
Therefore, will you confess that these things were begged of you, for you will not dare to say they were purchased of you; that you granted those magistracies to men out of favour, and not with a new to the interests of the republic?
And when you confess this, will any one doubt that you incurred that unpopularity held hatred among the different tribes of that province, not out of ambition, nor for the sake of doing a kindness to any one, but with the object of procuring money?
Therefore those censors did the same thing that those do in our republic, who have got offices by bribery; they took care to use their power so as to fill up again that gap in their property.
The census was so taken, when you were praetor, that the affairs of no state whatever could be administered according to such a census. For they made a low return of the incomes of all the richest men, and exaggerated that of each poor man.
And so in levying the taxes so heavy a burden was laid upon the common people, that even if the men themselves said nothing, the facts alone would discredit that census, as may easily be understood from the circumstances themselves.
For Lucius Metellus who, after I came into Sicily for the sake of prosecuting my injuries, became on a sudden after the arrival of Letilius not only the friend of Verres, but even his relative; because he saw that that census could not possibly stand, ordered that former one to be attended to which had been when that most gallant and upright man, Sextus Peducaeus, was praetor.
For at that time there were censors made according to the laws, elected by their cities, in whose case, if they did anything wrong, punishments were appointed by the law.
But when you were praetor, how could the censor either fear the law, by which he was not bound, since he had not been created by the law; or fear your reproof for having sold what he had bought of you?
Let Metellus now detain my witnesses let him compel others to praise him, as he has attempted in many instances; only let him do what he is doing.
For whoever was treated by any one with such insult, with so much ignominy?
Every fifth year a census is taken of all Sicily.
A census was taken when Peducaeus was praetor.
When the five years had elapsed in your praetorship, a census was taken again.
The next year Lucius Metellus forbids any mention to be made of your census; he says that censors must be created afresh; and in the meantime he orders the census of Peducaeus to be attended to.
If an enemy of yours had done this to you, although the province would have borne it with great equanimity, still it would have seemed the severe decision of an enemy.
A new friend, a voluntary relation did it.
For he could not do otherwise, if he wished to retain the province in its allegiance, if he wished to live himself in safety in the province .
Are you waiting to see what these men also will decide?
If he had deprived you of your office, he would have treated you with less insult, than when he abrogated and annulled the things which you had done in your office.
Nor did he behave in this way in that matter alone, but he had done the same in many other matters of the greatest importance, before I arrived in Sicily.
For he ordered your friends, the palaestra people, to restore his property to Heraclius the Syracusan, and the people of Bidis to restore his property to Epicrates, and Appius Claudius his to his ward at Drepanum; and, if Letilius had not arrived in Sicily with letters a little too soon, in less than thirty days Metellus would have annulled your whole three years' praetorship.
And, since I have spoken of that money which the censors paid to you for your statue, it seems to me that I ought not to pass over that method of raising money, which you exacted from the cities on presence of erecting statues.
For I see that the sum total of that money is very large, amounting to a hundred and twenty thousand sesterces. This much is proved by the evidence and letters of the cities.
And he admits that, and indeed he cannot say otherwise.
What sort of conduct then are we to think that which he denies, when these actions which he confesses are so infamous?
For what do you wish to be believed?
That all that money was spent in statues?
Suppose it was.
Still this is by no means to be endured, that the allies should be robbed of so much money, in order that statues of a most infamous robber may be placed in every alley, where it appears scarcely possible to pass in safety.
But where in the world, or on what statues, was that enormous sum of money spent?
It will be spent, you will say.
Let us, forsooth, wait for the recurrence of that regular five years.
If in this interval he has not spent it then at last we will impeach him for embezzlement in the article of statues.
He is brought before the court as a criminal on many most important charges. We see that a hundred and twenty thousand sesterces have been taken on this one account.
If you are condemned, you will not, I presume, trouble yourself about having that money spent on statues within five years. If you are acquitted, who will be so insane as to attack you in five years' time on the subject of the statues, after you have escaped from so many and such grave charges?
If, therefore, this money has not been spent as yet, and if it is evident that it will not be spent, we may understand that a plan has been found out by which he may take and appropriate to himself a hundred and twenty thousand sesterces at one swoop, and by which others too,
if this is sanctioned by you, may take as large sums as ever they please on similar grounds; so that we shall appear not to deter men from taking money, but, as we approve of some methods of taking money, we shall seem rather to be giving decent names to the basest actions.
In truth, suppose, for example, that Caius Verres had demanded a hundred and twenty thousand sesterces from the people of Centuripa, and had taken this money from them; there would have been no doubt, I conceive, that, if that were proved, he must have been condemned.
What then?
Suppose he demanded three hundred thousand sesterces of the same people; and compelled them to give them, and carried them off? Shall he be acquitted because it was entered in the accounts that that money was given for statues?
I think not; unless, indeed, our object is to create, not an unwillingness to take money on the part of our magistrates, but a cause for giving it on the part of our allies.
But if statues are a great delight to any one, and if any one is greatly attracted by the honour and glory of having them raised to him, still he must lay down these rules; first of all, that he must not take to his own house the money given for those purposes; secondly, that there must be some limit to those statues; and lastly, that at all events they must not be exacted from unwilling people.
And concerning the embezzlement of the money, I ask of you whether the cities themselves were accustomed to let out contracts for erecting statues to the man who would take the contract on the best terms, or to appoint some surveyor to superintend the erection of the statues, or to pay the money to you, or to any one whom you appointed?
For the statues were erected under the superintendence of those men by whom that honour was paid to you I am glad to hear it; but, if that money was paid to Timarchides, cease I beg of you, to pretend that you were desirous of glory and of monuments when you are detected is so evident a robbery.
What then?
Is there to be no limit to statues?
But there must be.
Indeed, consider the matter in this way.
The city of Syracuse (to speak of that city in preference to others) gave him a statue; it is an honour: and gave his father one; a pretty and profitable picture of affection: and gave his son one; this may be endured, for they did not hate the boy:
still how often, and for how many individuals will you take statues from the Syracusans?
You accepted one to be placed in the forum.
You compelled them to place one in the senate-house.
You ordered them to contribute money for those statues which were to be erected at Rome. You ordered that the same men should also contribute as agriculturists, they did so. You ordered the same men also to pay their contribution to the common revenue of Sicily; even that they did also.
When one city contributed money on so many different presences, and when the other cities did the same, does not the fact itself warn you to think that some bounds must be put to this covetousness?
But if no city did this of its own accord; if all of them only paid you this money for statues because they were induced to do so by your command, by fear, by force, by injury; then, O ye immortal gods, can it be doubtful to any one, that, even if any one were to establish a law, that it was allowable to accept money for statues, still he would also establish one, that at all events it was not allowable to extort it?
First, therefore, I will cite the whole of Sicily as a witness on this point; and Sicily declares to me with one voice that an immense sum of money was extorted from her by force under the name of providing statues.
For the deputations of all the cities, in their common petitions nearly all of which have arisen from your injuries, have inserted this demand also; "that they might not for the future promise statues to any one till he had left the province.
" There have been many praetors in Sicily.
Often, in the times of our ancestors, the Sicilians have approached the senate; often in the memory of the present generation; but it is your praetorship that has introduced and originated a new kind of petition.	-"
For what else is so strange, not only in the matter but in the very form of the petition?
For other points which occur in the same petitions with reference to your injuries, are indeed novel, but still they are not urged in a novel manner.
The Sicilians beg and entreat of the conscript fathers that our magistrates may henceforth sell the tenths according to the law of Hiero.
You were the first who had sold them in a way contrary to that law.
That they may not put a money value on the corn which is ordered for the public granary.
This, too, is now requested for the first time on account of your three denarii: but that kind of petition is not unprecedented.
That a charge be not taken against any one in his absence.
This has arisen from the misfortune of Sthenius, and your tyranny.
I will not enumerate the other points.
All the demands of the Sicilians are of such a nature that they look like charges collected against you alone as a criminal.
Still all these, though they refer to new injuries, preserve the ordinary form of requests. But this request about the statues must seem ridiculous to the man who is not acquainted with the facts and with the meaning of it; for they entreat that they may not be compelled to erect statues; what then?
That they may not be allowed to do so; what does this mean?
Do you request of me not to be allowed to do what it depends on yourself to do or not?
Ask rather that no one may compel you to promise a statue, or to erect one against your will.
I shall do no good, says he; for they will all deny that they compelled me to do so: if you wish for my preservation, put this violence on me, that it may be utterly illegal for me to make such a promise.
It is from your praetorship that such a request as this has taken its rise; and those who employ it, intimate and openly declare that they, entirely against their will, contributed money for your statues, being compelled by fear and violence.
Even suppose they did not say this, still, would it not be impossible for you to avoid confessing it?
See and consider what defence you are going to adopt; for then you will understand that you must confess this about the statues.
For I am informed that your cause is planned out in this way by your advocates, men of great ingenuity, and that you are instructed and trained by them in this way; that, as each influential and honourable man from the province of Sicily gives an energetic testimony against you, as many of the lending Sicilians have already done to a great extent, you are immediately to say to your defenders, "That man is an enemy of mine because he is an agriculturist.
And so, I suppose, you have it in your mind to set aside the class of agriculturists, saving that they have come with a hostile and inimical disposition towards Verres because he was a little strict in collecting the tenths.
The agriculturists, then, are all your enemies, all your adversaries.
There is not one of them who does not wish you dead.
Altogether you are admirably well off, when that order and class of men which is the most virtuous and honourable, by which both the republic in general, and most especially that province upheld, as fixedly hostile to you.
However, be it so; another time we will consider of the disposition of the agriculturists and of their injuries. For the present I assume, what you grant me, that they are most hostile to you.
You say, forsooth, on account of the tenths.
I grant that; I do not inquire whether they are enemies with or without reason.
What then is the meaning of those gilt equestrian statues which greatly offend the feelings and eyes of the Roman people, near the temple of Vulcan?
For I see an inscription on them stating that the agriculturists had presented one of them.
If they gave this statue to do you honour, they are not your enemies.
Let us believe the witnesses; for then they were consulting your honour, now they are regarding their own consciences.
But if they presented the statues under the compulsion of fear, you must confess that you exacted money in the province on account of statues by violence and fear.
Choose whichever alternative you like.
 In truth I would willingly now abandon this charge about the statues, to have you admit to me, what would be most honourable to you, that the agriculturists contributed this money for a statue to do you honour, of their own free will.
Grant me this.
In a moment you cut from under your feet the principal part of your defence.
For then you will not be able to say that the agriculturists were angry with and enemies to you.
O singular cause;
O miserable and ruinous defence;
for the defendant, and he too a defendant who has been praetor in Sicily, to be unwilling to receive an admission from his accuser that the agriculturists erected him a statue of their own free will, that they have a good opinion of him, that they are his friends, that they desire his safety!
He is afraid of your believing this, for he is overwhelmed with the evidence given against him by the agriculturists.
I will avail myself of what is granted to me;
at all events you must judge that those men, who, as he himself wishes it to be believed, are most hostile to him, did not contribute money for his honour and for his monuments of their own free will.
And that this may be most easily understood, ask any one you please of the witnesses whom I shall produce, who are witnesses from Sicily, whether a Roman citizen or a Sicilian, and one too who appears most hostile to you, who says that he has been plundered by you, whether he contributed anything in his own name to the statue? You will not find one man to deny it In truth they all contributed.
Do you think then that any one will doubt that he who ought to be most hostile to you, who has received the severest injuries from you, paid money on account of a statue to you because he was compelled by violence and authoritative command, not out of kindness and by his own free will?
And I have neither counted up, nor been able to count, O judges, the amount of this money, which is very large, and which has been most shamelessly extorted from unwilling men, so as to estimate how much was extorted from agriculturists, how much from traders who trade at Syracuse, at Agrigentum, at Panormus, at Lilybaeum; since you see by even his own confession that it was extorted from most unwilling contributors.
I come now to the cities of Sicily, in which case it is exceedingly easy to form an opinion of their inclination.
Did the Sicilians also contribute against their will?
It is not probable.
In truth it is evident that Caius Verres so conducted himself during his praetorship in Sicily, that, as he could not satisfy both parties, both the Sicilians and the Romans, he considered rather his duty to our allies, than his ambition, which might have prompted him to gratify the citizens.
And therefore I saw him called in an inscription at Syracuse, not only the patron of that island, but also the saviour of it.
What a great expression is this!
so great that it cannot be expressed by any single Latin word.
He in truth is a saviour, who has given salvation.
In his name days of festival are kept that fine Verrean festival not as if it was the festival of Marcellus, but instead of the Marcellean festival, which they abolished at his command.
His triumphal arch is in the forum at Syracuse, on which his son stands, naked; and he himself from horseback looks down on the province which has been stripped bare by himself.
His statues are in every place; which seem to show this, that he very nearly erected as many statues at Syracuse as he had taken away from it.
And even at Rome we see an inscription in his honour carved at the foot of the statues, in letters of the largest size, "that that were given by the community of Sicily. " Why were they given?
How can any one be induced to believe that such great honours were paid to him by people against their will?
 Here, too, you must deliberate and consider even much more than you did in the case of the agriculturists, what you intend.
It is an important matter.
Do you wish the Sicilians, both in their public and private capacity, to be considered friends to you, or enemies?
If enemies, what is to become of you?
Whither will you free for refuge?
On what will you depend?
Just now you repudiated the greater part of the agriculturists, most honourable and wealthy men, both Sicilians and Roman citizens. Now, what will you do about the Sicilian cities?
Will you say that the Sicilians are friendly to you?
How can you say so?
They who (though they have never done such a thing in the instance of any one else before, as to give public evidence against him, even though many men who have been praetors in that province have been condemned, and only two, who have been prosecuted, have been acquitted) t
hey, I say, who now come with letters, with commissions, with public testimonies against you, while, if they were to utter a panegyric on you in behalf of their state, they would appear to do so according to their usual custom, rather than because of your deserts.
When these men make a public complaint of your actions, do they not show this that your injuries have been so great that they preferred to depart from their ancient habit, rather than not speak of your habits?
You must, therefore, inevitably confess that the Sicilians are hostile to you; since they have addressed to the consuls petitions of the gravest moment directed against you, and have entreated me to undertake this cause, and the advocacy of their safety; since, though they were forbidden to come by the praetor, and hindered by four quaestors, they still have thought every one's threats and every danger insignificant, in comparison with their safety; since at the former pleading they gave their evidence so earnestly and so bitterly, that Hortensius said that Artemo, the deputy of Centuripa, end the witness authorized by the public council there, was an accuser, not a witness.
In truth he, together with Andron, a most honourable and trustworthy man, both on account of his virtue and integrity, and also on account of his eloquence, was appointed by his fellow-citizens as their deputy in order that he might be able to explain in the most intelligible and clear manner the numerous and various injuries which they have sustained from Verres.
The people of Halesa, of Catana, of Tyndaris, of Enna, of Herbita, of Agyrium, of Netum, of Segesta, gave evidence also. It is needless to enumerate them all.
You know how many gave evidence, and how many things they proved at the former pleading.
Now both they and the rest shall give their evidence.
Every one, in short, shall be made aware of this fact in this cause, that the feelings of the Sicilians are such, that if that man be not punished, they think that they must leave their habitations and their homes and depart from Sicily, and flee to some distant land.
Will you persuade us that these men contributed large sums of money to confer honour and dignity on you of their own free will?
I suppose, forsooth, they who did not like you to remain in safety in your own city, wished to have memorials of your person and name in their own cities!
The facts show that they wished it.
For I have been for some time thinking that I was handling the argument about the inclination of the Sicilians towards you too tenderly, as to whether they were desirous to erect statues to you, or were compelled to do so.
What man ever lived of whom such a thing was heard as has happened to you, that his statues in his province, erected in the public places, and some of them even in the holy temples, were thrown down by force by the whole population?
There have been many guilty magistrates in Asia, many in Africa, many in Spain, in Gaul, in Sardinia, many in Sicily itself, but did we ever hear such a thing as this of any of them?
It is an unexampled thing, O judges, a sort of prodigy amazing the Sicilians, and among all the Greeks.
I would not have believed that story about the statues, if I had not seen them myself uprooted and lying on the ground; because it is a custom among all the Greeks to think that honours paid to men by monuments of that sort, are, to some extent, consecrated, and under the protection of the gods.
Therefore, when the Rhodians, almost single-handed, carried on the first war against Mithridates, and withstood all his power and his most vigorous attacks on their walls, and shores, and fleets, when they, beyond all other nations, were enemies to the king; still, even then, at the time of imminent danger to their city, they did not touch his statue which was among them in the most frequented place in their city.
Perhaps there might seem some inconsistency in preserving the effigy and image of the man, when they were striving to overthrow the man himself:
but still I saw, when I was among them, that they had a religious feeling in those matters handed down to them from their ancestors, and that they argued in this way; that as to the statue, they regarded the period when it had been erected; but as to the man, they regarded the fact of his waging war against them, and being an enemy.
You see, therefore, that the custom and religious feeling of the Greeks, which is accustomed to defend the monuments of enemies, even at a time of actual war, could not, even in a time of profound peace, protect the statues of a praetor of the Roman people.
The men of Tauromenium which is a city in alliance with us, most quiet men, who were formerly as far removed as possible from the injuries of our magistrates, owing to the protection the treaty was to them; yet even they did not hesitate to overturn that man's statue.
But when that was removed, they allowed the pedestal to remain in the forum, because they thought it would tell more strongly against him, if men knew that his statue had been thrown down by the Tauromenians, than if they thought that none had ever been erected.
The men of Tyndarus threw down his statue in the forum; and for the same reason left the horse without a rider.
At Leontini, even in that miserable and desolate city, his statue in the gymnasium was thrown down.
For why should I speak of the Syracusans?
when that act was not a private act of the Syracusans, but was done by them in common with all their neighbouring allies, and withal most the whole province?
How great a multitude, how vast a concourse of men is said to have been present when his statues were pulled down and overturned!
But where was this done?
In the most frequented and sacred place of the whole city; before Serapis himself, in the very entrance and vestibule of the temple.
And if Metellus had not acted with great vigour, and by his authority, and by a positive edict forbidden it, there would not have been a trace of a statue of that man left in all Sicily.
And I am not afraid of any of these things seeming to have been done in consequence of my arrival, much less in consequence of my instigation.
All those things were done, not only before I arrived in Sicily, but before he reached Italy.
While I was in Sicily, no statue was thrown down.
Hear now what was done after I departed from thence.
The senate of Centuripa decreed, and the people ordered, that the quaestors should issue a contract for taking down whatever statues there were of Caius Verres himself, of his father, and of his son; and that while such demolition was being executed, there should be not less than thirty senators present.
Remark the soberness and dignity of that city.
They neither chose that those statues should remain in their city which they themselves had given against their will, under the pressure of authority and violence; nor the statues of that man, against whom they themselves (a thing which they never did before) had sent by a public vote commissions and deputies, with the most weighty testimony, to Rome.
And they thought that it would be a more important thing if it seemed to have been done by public authority, than by the violence of the multitude.
When, in pursuance of this design, the people of Centuripa had publicly destroyed his statues, Metellus hears of it. He is very indignant; he summons before him the magistrates of Centuripa and the ten principal citizens.
He threatens them with measures of great severity, if they do not replace the statues.
They report the matter to the senate.
The statues, which could do no good to his cause, are replaced; the decrees of the people of Centuripa, which had been passed concerning the statues, are not taken away.
Here I can excuse some of the actors.
I cannot at all excuse Metellus, a wise man, if he acts foolishly.
What?
did he think it would look like a crime in Verres, if his statues were thrown down, a thing which is often done by the wind, or by some accident?
There could be in such a fact as that no charge against the man, no reproof of him.
Whence, then, does the charge and accusation arise?
From the intention and will of the people by whom it was caused.
 I, if Metellus had not compelled the men of Centuripa to replace the statues, should say, "See, O judges, what exceeding and bitter indignation the injuries of that man have implanted in the minds of our allies and friends; when that most friendly and faithful city of Centuripa, which is, connected with the Roman people by so many reciprocal good offices, that it has not only always loved our republic, but has also shown its attachment to the very name of Roman in the person of every private individual, has decided by public resolution and by the public authority that the statues of Caius Verres ought not to exist in it. "
I should recite the decrees of the people of Centuripa; I should extol that city, as with the greatest truth I might; I should relate that ten thousand of those citizens, the bravest and most faithful of our allies, that every one of the whole people resolved, that there ought to be no monument of that man in their city.
I should say this if Metellus had not replaced the statues.
I should now wish to ask of Metellus himself, whether by his power and authority he has at all weakened my speech?
I think the very same language is still appropriate.
For, even if the statues were ever so much thrown down, I could not show them to you on the ground. This only statement could I use, that so wise a city had decided that the statues of Caius Verres ought to be demolished.
And this argument Metellus has not taken from me.
He has even given me this additional one; he has enabled me to complain, if I thought fit, that authority is exercised over our friends and allies with so much injustice, that, even in the services they do people, they are not allowed to use their own unbiased judgment;
he has enabled me to entreat you to form your conjectures, how you suppose Lucius Metellus behaved to me in those matters in which he was able to injure me, when he behaved with such palpable partiality in this one in which he could be no hindrance to me.
But I am not angry with Metellus, nor do I wish to rob him of his excuse which he puts forth to every one, that he did nothing spitefully nor with any especial design.
 Now, therefore, it is so evident that you cannot deny it, that no statue was given to you with the good will of any one; no money on account of statues, that was not squeezed out and extorted by force.
And, in making that charge, I do not wish that alone to be understood, that you get money to the amount of a hundred and twenty thousand sesterces; but much more do I wish to have this point seen clearly, which was proved at the same time, namely, how great both is and was the hatred borne to you by the agriculturists, and by all the Sicilians.
And as to this point, what your defence is to be I cannot guess.
 "Yes, the Sicilians hate me, because I did a great deal for the sake of the Roman citizens. "
But they too are most bitter against you, and most hostile.
I have the Roman citizens for my enemies, because I defended the interests and rights of the allies.
But the allies complain that they were considered and treated by you as enemies.
"The agriculturists are hostile to me on account of the tenths.
Well;
they who cultivate land untaxed and free from this impost; why do they hate you?
why do the men of Halesa, of Centuripa, of Segesta, of Halicya hate you?
What race of men, what number of men, what rank of men can you name that does not hate you, whether they be Roman citizens or Sicilians?
So that even if I could not give a reason for their hating you, still I should think that the fact ought to be mentioned and that you also O judges, ought to hate the man whom all men hate.
Will you dare to say, either that the agriculturists, that all the Sicilians, in short, think well of you, or that it has nothing to do with the subject what they think?
You will not dare to say this, nor if you were to wish to do so would you be allowed.
For those equestrian statues erected by the Sicilians, whom you affect to despise, and by the agriculturists, deprive you of the power of saying that; the statues, I mean, which a little while before you came to the city you ordered to be erected and to have inscriptions put upon them, to serve as a check to the inclinations of all your enemies and accusers.
For who would be troublesome to you, or who would dare to bring an action against you, when he saw statues erected to you by traders, by agriculturists, by the common voice of all Sicily?
What other class of men is there in that province?
None.
Therefore he is not only loved, but even honored by the whole province, and also by each separate portion of it, according to their class.
Who will dare to touch this man?
Can you then say that the evidence of agriculturists, of traders, and of all the Sicilians against you, ought to be no objection to you, when you hoped to be able to extinguish all your unpopularity and infamy by placing their names in an inscription on your statues?
Or, if you attempted to add honour to your statues by their authority, shall I not be able to corroborate my argument by the dignity of those same men?
Unless, perchance, in that matter, some little hope still consoles you, because you were popular among the farmers of the revenues:
but I have taken care, through my diligence, that that popularity should not serve, you have contrived, by your own wisdom, to show that it ought to be, an injury to you.
Listen, O judges, to the whole affair in a few words.
In the collecting the tax on pasture lands in Sicily there is a sub-collector of the name of Lucius Carpinatius, who both for the sake of his own profit, and perhaps because he thought it for the interest of his partners, cultivated the favour of Verres to the neglect of everything else.
He, while he was attending the praetor about all the markets, and never leaving him, had got into such familiarity with, and aptitude at the practice of selling Verres's decrees and decisions, and managing his other concerns, that he was considered almost a second Timarchides.
He was in one respect still more important; because he also lent money at usury to those who were purchasing anything of the praetor.
And this usury, O judges, was such that even the profit from the other transactions was inferior to the gain obtained by it.
For the money which he entered as paid to those with whom he was dealing, he entered also under the name of Verres's secretary, or of Timarchides, or even under Verres's own name, as received from them.
And besides that, he lent other large sums belonging to Verres, of which he made no entry at all, in his own name.
Originally this Carpinatius, before he had become so intimate with Verres, had often written letters to the shareholders about his unjust actions.
But Canuleius, who had an agency at Syracuse, in the harbour, had also written accounts to his shareholders of many of Verres's robberies, giving instances, especially, concerning things which had been exported from Syracuse without paying the harbour dues. But the same company was farming both the harbour dues and the taxes on pasture land.
And thus it happened that there were many things which we could state and produce against Verres from the letters of that company.
But it happened that Carpinatius, who had by this time become connected with him by the greatest intimacy, and also by community of interests, afterwards sent frequent letters to his partners, speaking of his exceeding kindness, and of his services to their common property.
And in truth, as he was used to do and to decree everything which Carpinatius requested him, Carpinatius also began to write still more flaming accounts to his shareholders, in order, if possible, utterly to efface the recollection of all that he had written before.
But at last, when Verres was departing, he sent letters to them, to beg them to go out in crowds to meet him and to give him thanks; and to promise zealously that they would do whatever he desired them.
And the shareholders did so, according to the old custom of farmers; not because they thought him deserving of any honour, but because they thought it was for their own interest to be thought to remember kindness, and to be grateful for it.
They expressed their thanks to him, and said that Carpinatius had often sent letters to them mentioning his good offices.
When he had made answer that he had done those things gladly, and had greatly extolled the services of Carpinatius, he charges a friend of his, who at that time was the chief collector of that company, to take care diligently, and to make sure that there was nothing in any of the letters of any of the partners which could tell against his safety and reputation.
Accordingly he, having got rid of the main body of the shareholders, summons the collectors of the tenths, and communicates the business to them.
They resolve and determine that those letters in which any attack was made on the character of Caius Verres shall be removed, and that care he taken that that business shall not by any possibility be any injury to Caius Verres.
If I prove that the collectors of the truths passed this resolution, if I make it evident that, according to this decree, the letters were removed, what more would you wait for?
Can I produce to you any affair more absolutely decided? Can I bring before your tribunal any criminal more fully condemned?
But condemned by whose judgment?
By that, forsooth, of those men whom they who wish for severe tribunals think ought to decide on causes, by the judgment of the farmers, whom the people is now demanding to have for judges, and concerning whom, that we may have them for judges, we at this moment see a law proposed, not by a man of our body, not by a man born of the equestrian order, not by a man of the noblest birth:
the collectors of the tenths, that is to say, the chiefs, and, as it were, the senators of the farmers, voted that these letters should be removed out of sight.
I have men, who were present, whom I can produce, to whom I will entrust this proof, most honourable and wealthy men, the very chief of the equestrian order, on whose high credit the very speech and cause of the man who has proposed this law mainly relies.
They shall come before you; they shall say what they determined.
Indeed, if I know the men properly, they will not speak falsely For they were able, indeed, to put letters to their community out of sight; they have not been able to put out of sight their own good faith and conscientiousness.
Therefore the Roman knights, who condemned you by their judgment, have not been willing to be condemned in the judgment of those judges.
Do you now consider whether you prefer to follow their decision or their inclination.
But see now, how far the zeal of your friends, your own devices, and the inclination of those partners aid you.
I will speak a little more openly; for I am not afraid of any one thinking that I am saying this in the spirit of an accuser rather than with proper freedom.
If the collectors had not removed those letters according to the resolution of the farmers of the tenths, I could only say against you what I had found in those letters; but now that the resolution has been passed, and the letters have been removed, I may say whatever I can, and the judge may suspect whatever he chooses.
I say that you exported from Syracuse an immense weight of gold, of silver, of ivory, of purple; much cloth from Melita, much embroidered stuff, much furniture of Delos, many Corinthian vessels, a great quantity of corn, an immense load of honey; and that on account of these things, because no port dues were paid on them, Lucius Canuleius, who was the agent in the harbour, sent letters to his partners.
Does this appear a sufficiently grave charge?
None, I think, can be graver.
What will Hortensius say in defence?
Will he demand that I produce the letters of Canuleius?
Will he say that a charge of this sort is worthless unless it be supported by letters?
I shall cry out that the letters have been put out of the way; that by a resolution of the shareholders the proofs and evidences of his thefts have been taken from me.
He must either contend that this has not been done, or he must bear the brunt of all my weapons.
Do you deny that this was done?
I am glad to hear that defence. I descend into the arena;
for equal terms and an equal contest are before us.
I will produce witnesses, and I will produce many at the same time; since they were together when this took place, they shall be together now also.
When they are examined, let them be bound not only by the obligation of their oath and regard for their character, but also by a common consciousness of the truth.
If it be proved that this did take place as I say it did, will you be able to say, O Hortensius, that there was nothing in those letters to hurt Verres?
You not only will not say so, but you will not even be able to say this, that there was not as much in them as I say there was.
This then is what you have brought about by your wisdom and by your interest; that, as I said a little while ago, you have given me the greatest licence for accusing, and he judges the most ample liberty to believe anything.
 But though this be the case, still I will invent nothing.
I will recollect that I have not taken a criminal to accuse, but that I have received clients to defend; and that you ought to hear the cause not as it might be produced by me, but as it has been brought to me;
that I shall satisfy the Sicilians, if I diligently set forth what I have known myself in Sicily, and what I have heard from them; that I shall satisfy the Roman people, if I fear neither the violence nor the influence of any one; that I shall satisfy you, if by my good faith and diligence I give you an opportunity of deciding correctly and honestly; that I shall satisfy myself, if I do not depart a hair's breadth from that course of life which I have proposed to myself.
Wherefore, you have no ground to fear that I will invent anything against you.
You have cause even to be glad;
for I shall pass over many things which I know to have been done by you, because they are either too infamous, or scarcely credible.
I will only discuss this whole affair of this society.
That you may now hear the truth, I will ask, Was such a resolution passed?
When I have ascertained that, I will ask, Have the letters been removed?
When that too, is proved , you will understand the matter, even if I say nothing.
If they who passed this resolution for his sake namely, the Roman knights were now also judges in his case, they would beyond all question condemn that man, concerning whom they knew that letters which laid bare his robberies had been sent to themselves, and had been removed by their own resolution.
He, therefore, who must have been condemned by those Roman knights who desire everything to turn out for his interest, and who have been most kindly treated by him, can he, O judges, by any possible means or contrivance be acquitted by you?
And that you may not suppose that those things which have been removed out of the way, and taken from you, were all so carefully hidden, and kept so secretly, that with all the diligence which I am aware is universally expected of me nothing concerning them has been able to be arrived at or discovered, I must tell you that, whatever could by any means or contrivance be found out, has been found out, O judges.
You shall see in a moment the man detected in the very act;
for as I have spent a great part of my life in attending to the causes of farmers, and have paid great attention to that body, I think that I am sufficiently acquainted with their customs by experience and by intercourse with them.
 Therefore, when I ascertained that the letters of the company were removed out of the way, I made a calculation of the years that that man had been in Sicily; then I inquired (what was exceedingly easy to discover) who during those years had been the collectors of that company, in whose care the records had been.
For I was aware that it was the custom of the collectors who kept the records, when they gave them up to the new collector, to retain copies of the documents themselves.
And therefore I went in the first place to Lucius Vibius, a Roman knight, a man of the highest consideration, who, I ascertained, had been collector that very year about which I particularly had to inquire.
I came upon the man unexpectedly when he was thinking of other things.
I investigated what I could, and inquired into everything.
I found only two small books, which had been sent by Lucius Canuleius to the shareholders from the harbour at Syracuse; in which there was entered an account of many months, and of things exported in Verres's name without having paid harbour dues. These I sealed up immediately.
These were documents of that sort which of all the papers of the company I was most anxious to find; but still I only found enough, O judges, to produce to you as a sample, as it were.
But still, whatever is in these books, however unimportant it may seem to be, will at all events be undeniable; and by this you will be able to form your conjectures as to the rest.
Read for me, I beg, this first book, and then the other.
The books of Canuleius.
I do not ask now whence you got those four hundred jars of honey, or such quantities of Maltese cloth, or fifty cushions for sofas or so many candelabra; I do not, I say, inquire at present where you got these things; but, how you could want such a quantity of them, that I do ask.
I say nothing about the honey; but what could you want with so many Maltese garments?
as if you were going to dress all your friends' wives; or with so many sofa cushions?
as if you were going to furnish all their villas.
As in these little books there are only the accounts of a few months, conjecture in your minds what they must have been for the whole three years.
This is what I contend for. From these small books found in the house of one collector of the company, you can form some conjecture how great a robber that man was in that province; what a number of desires, what different ones, what countless ones he indulged; what immense sums he made not only in money, but invested also in articles of this sort; which shall be detailed to you more fully another time.
At present listen to this.
By these exportations, of which the list was read to you, he writes that the shareholders had lost sixty thousand sesterces by the five per cent due on them as harbour dues at Syracuse.
In a few months, therefore, as these little insignificant books show, things were stolen by the praetor and exported from one single town of the value of twelve hundred thousand sesterces.
Think now, as the island is one which is accessible by sea on all sides, what you can suppose was exported from other places?
from Agrigentum, from Lilybaeum, from Panormus, from Thermae, from Halesa, from Catina, from the other towns? And what from Messana? the place which he thought safe for his purpose above all others, where he was always easy and comfortable in his mind, because he had selected the Mamertines as men to whom he could send everything which was either to be preserved carefully, or exported secretly.
After these books had been found, the rest were removed and concealed more carefully; but we, that all men may see that we are acting without any ulterior motive, are content with these books which we have produced.
Now we will return to the accounts of the society of money received and paid, which they could not possibly remove honestly, and to your friend Carpinatius.
We inspected at Syracuse accounts of the company made up by Carpinatius, which showed by many items that many of the men who had paid money to Verres, had borrowed it of Carpinatius. That will be clearer than daylight to you, O judges, when I produce the very men who paid the money; for you will see that the times at which, as they were in danger, they bought themselves off, agree with the records of the company not only as to the years, but even as to the months.
While we were examining this matter thoroughly, and holding the documents actually in our hands, we see on a sudden erasures of such a sort as to appear to be fresh wounds inflicted on papers.
Immediately, having a suspicion of something wrong, we bent our eyes and attention on the names themselves.
Money was entered as having been received from Caius Verrutius the son of Caius, in such a way that the letters had been let stand down to the second R, all the rest was an erasure.
A second, a third, a fourth there were a great many names in the same state.
As the matter was plain, so also was the abominable and scandalous worthlessness of the accounts.
We began to inquire of Carpinatius who that Verrutius was, with whom he had such extensive pecuniary dealings.
The man began to hesitate, to look away, to colour.
Because there is a provision made by law with respect to the accounts of the farmers, forbidding their being taken to Rome; in order that the matter might be as clear and as completely proved as possible, I summon Carpinatius before the tribunal of Metellus and produce the accounts of the company in the forum.
There is a great rush of people to the place; and as the partnership existing between Carpinatius and that praetor, and his usury, were well known, all people were watching with the most eager expectation to see what was contained in the accounts .
 I bring the matter before Metellus; I state to him that I have seen the accounts of the shareholders, that in these there is a long account of one Caius Verrutius made up of many items, and that I saw, by a computation of the years and months, that this Verrutius had had no account at all with Carpinatius, either before the arrival of Caius Verres, or after his departure.
I demand that Carpinatius shall give me an answer who that Verrutius is; whether he is a merchant, or a broker, or an agriculturist, or a grazier; whether he is in Sicily, or whether he has now left it.
All who were in the court cried out at once that there had never been any one in Sicily of the name of Verrutius.
I began to press the man to answer me who he was, where he was, whence he came; why the servant of the company who made up the accounts always made a blunder in the name of Verrutius at the same place?
And I made this demand, not because I thought it of any consequence that he should be compelled to answer me these things against his will, but that the robberies of one, the dishonesty of the other, and the audacity of both might be made evident to all the world.
And so I leave him in the court, dumb from fear and the consciousness of his crimes, terrified out of his wits, and almost frightened to death; I take a copy of the accounts in the forum, with a great crowd of men standing round me; the most eminent men in the assembly are employed in making the copy; the letters and the erasures are faithfully copied and imitated, and transferred from the accounts into books.
The copy was examined and compared with the original with the greatest care and diligence, and then sealed up by most honourable men.
If Carpinatius would not answer me then, do you, O Verres, answer me now, who you imagine this Verrutius, who must almost be one of your own family, to be.
It is quite impossible that you should not have known a man in your own province, who, I see, was in Sicily while you were praetor, and who, I perceive from the accounts themselves, was a very wealthy man.
And now, that this may not be longer in obscurity, advance into the middle, open the volume, the copy of the accounts, so that every one may be able to see now, not the traces only of that man's avarice, but the very bed in which it lay.
You see the word Verrutius?
You see the first letters untouched?
you see the last part of the name, the tail of Verres, smothered in the erasure, as in the mud.
The original accounts, O judges, are in exactly the same state as this copy.
What are you waiting for? What more do you want?
You, Verres, why are you sitting there? Why do you delay?
for either you must show us Verrutius, or confess that you yourself are Verrutius.
The ancient orators are extolled, the Crassi and Antonii, because they had the skill to efface the impression made by an accusation with great clearness, and to defend the causes of accused persons with eloquence.
It was not, forsooth, in ability only that they surpassed those who are now employed here as counsel, but also in good fortune.
No one, in those times, committed such crimes as to leave no room for any defence; no one lived in such a manner that no part of his life was free from the most extreme infamy; no one was detected in such manifest guilt, that, shameless as he had been in the action, he seemed still more shameless if he denied it.
 But now what can Hortensius do?
Can he argue against the charges of avarice by panegyrics on his client's economy?
He is defending a man thoroughly profligate, thoroughly licentious, thoroughly wicked.
Can he lead your attention away from this infamy and profligacy of his, and turn them into some other direction by a mention of his bravery?
But a man more inactive, more lazy, one who is more a man among women, a debauched woman among men, cannot be found.
But his manners are affable.
Who is more obstinate more rude? more arrogant?
But still all this is without any injury to any one.
Who has ever been more furious, more treacherous, and more cruel?
With such a defendant and such a cause, what could all the Crassus's and Antonius's in the world do?
This is all they would do, as I think, O Hortensius; they would have nothing to do with the cause at all, lest by contact with the impudence of another they might lose their own characters for virtue.
For they come to plead causes free and unshackled, so as not, if they did not choose to act shamelessly in defending people, to be thought ungrateful for abandoning them.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE SECOND PLEADING IN THE ACCUSATION AGAINST CAIUS VERRES.
ON THE COURT RELATING TO CORN.
Every man, O judges, who, without being prompted by any enmity, or stung by any private injury, or tempted by any reward, prosecutes another for the good of the republic, ought to consider, not only how great a burden he is liking upon himself at the time, but also how much trouble he is courting for the remainder of his life.
For he imposes on himself a law of innocence, of moderation, and of all virtues, who demands from another an account of his life; and he does so the more if, as I said before, he does this being urges by no other motive except a desire for the common good.
For if any one assumes to himself to correct the manners of others, and to reprove their faults, who will pardon him, if he himself turn aside in any particular from the strict line of duty?
Wherefore, a citizen of this sort is the more to he praised and beloved by all men for this reason also, that he does not only remove a worthless citizen from the republic, but he also promises and binds himself to be such a man as to be compelled, not only by an ordinary inclination to virtue and duty, but by even some more unavoidable principle, to live virtuously and honourably.
And, therefore, O judges, that most illustrious and most eloquent man, Lucius Crassus, was often heard to say that he did not repent of anything so much as having ever proceeded against Caius Carbo: for by so doing he had his inclination as to everything less uncontrolled, and he thought, too, that his way of life was remarked by more people than he liked.
And he, fortified as he was by the protection of his own genius and fortune, was yet hampered by this anxiety which he had brought upon himself, before his judgment was fully formed, at his entrance into life;
on which account virtue and integrity is less, looked for from those who undertake this business as young men, than from those who do so at a riper age;
for they, for the sake of credit and ostentation, become accusers of others before they have had time to take notice how much more free the life of those who have accused no one is.
We who have already shown both what we could do, and what judgment we had, unless we could easily restrain our desires, should never, of our own accord, deprive ourselves of all liberty and freedom in our way of life.
And I have a greater burden on me than those who have accused other men, (if that deserve to be called a burden which you bear with pleasure and delight,) but still I have in one respect undertaken a greater burden than others who have done the same thing, because all men are required to abstain most especially from those vices for which they have reproved another.
Have you accused any thief or rapacious man?
You must for ever avoid all suspicion of avarice.
Have you prosecuted any spiteful or cruel man?
You must for ever take care not to appear in any matter the least harsh or severe.
A seducer? an adulterer?
You must, take care most diligently that no trace of licentiousness be ever seen in your conduct.
In short, everything which you have impeached in another must be earnestly avoided by you your self.
In truth, not only no accuser, but no reprover even can be endured, who is himself detected in the vice which he reproves in another.
I, in the case of one man, am finding fault with every vice which can exist in a wicked and abandoned man. I say that there is no indication of lust, of wickedness, of audacity, which you cannot see clearly in the life of that one man.
In the case of this criminal, I, O judges, establish this law against myself; that I must so live as to appear to be, and always to have been, utterly unlike that man, not only in all my actions and words, but even in that arrogance and haughtiness of countenance and eyes which you see before you.
I will bear without uneasiness, O judges, that that course of life which was previously agreeable to me of my own accord, shall now, by the law and conditions I hare laid down for myself, become necessary for me.
And in the case of this man you often, O Hortensius, are asking me, under the pressure of what enmity or what injury I have come forward to accuse him.
I omit all mention of my duty, and of my connection with the Sicilians; I answer you as to the point of enmity.
Do you think there is any greater enmity than that arising from the opposite opinions of men, and the contrariety of their wishes and inclinations?
Can he who thinks good faith the holiest thing in life avoid being an enemy to that man who, as quaestor, dared to despoil, to desert, to betray, and to attack his consul, whose counsels he had shared, whose money he had received, with all whose business affairs he had been entrusted?
Can he who reverences modesty and chastity behold with equanimity the daily adulteries, the dissolute manners of that man, the domestic pandering to his passions?
Can he who wishes to pay due honours to the immortal gods, by any means avoid being an enemy to that man who has plundered all the temples, who has dared to commit his robberies even on the track of the wheels of the sacred car?
Must not he who thinks that all men ought to live under equal laws, be very hostile to you, when he considers the variety and caprice of your decrees?
Must not he who grieves at the injuries of the allies and the distresses of the provinces be excited against you by the plundering of Asia, the harassing of Pamphylia, the miserable state and the agony of Sicily?
Ought not he who desires the rights and the liberty of the Roman citizens to be held sacred among all men, to be even more than an enemy to you, when here collects your scourgings, your executions, your crosses erected for the punishment of Roman citizens?
Or if he had in any particular made a decree contrary to my interest unjustly, would you then think that I was fairly an enemy to him; but now that he has acted contrary to the interests, and property, and advantage, and inclination, and welfare of all good men, do you ask why I am an enemy to a man towards whom the whole Roman people is hostile?
I, who above all other men ought to undertake, to gratify the desires of the Roman people, even a greater burden and duty than my strength perhaps is equal to.
What?
cannot even those matters, which seem more trifling, move any one's mind, that the worthlessness and audacity of that man should have a more easy access to your own friendship, O Hortensius, and to that of other great and noble men, than the virtue and integrity of any one of us?
You hate the industry of new men; you despise their economy; you scorn their modesty; you wish their talents and virtues to be depressed and extinguished.
You are fond of Verres:
I suppose so.
If you are not gratified with his virtue, and his innocence, and his industry, and his modesty, and his chastity, at least you are transported at his conversation, his accomplishments, and his high breeding.
He has no such gifts; but, on the contrary, all his qualities are stained with the most extreme disgrace and infamy, with most extraordinary stupidity and boorishness.
If any man's house is open to this man, do you think it is open, or rather that it is yawning and begging something?
He is a favourite of your factors, of your valets.
Your freedmen, your slaves, your housemaids, are in love with him.
He, when he calls, is introduced out of his turn; he alone is admitted, while others, often most virtuous men, are excluded.
From which it is very easily understood that those people are the most dear to you who have lived in such a manner that without your protection they cannot be safe.
What?
do you think this can be endurable to any one, that we should live on slender incomes in such a way as not even to wish to acquire anything more; that we should be content with maintaining our dignity, and the goodwill of the Roman people, not by wealth, but by virtue; but that that man having robbed every one on all sides, and having escaped with impunity, should live, in prosperity and abundance?
that all your banquets should be decorated with his plate, your forum and hall of assembly with his statues and pictures? especially when, through your own valour, you are rich in all such trophies?
That it should be Verres who adorns your villas with his spoils?
That it should be Verres who is vying with Lucius Mummius: so that the one appears to have laid waste more cities of the allies, than the other overthrew belonging to the enemy?
That the one, unassisted, seems to have adorned more villas with the decorations of temples, than the other decorated-temples with the spoils of the enemy?
And shall he be dearer to you, in order that others may more willingly become subservient to your covetousness at their own risk?
 But these topics shall be mentioned at another time, and they have already been mentioned elsewhere.
Let us proceed to the other matters, after we have in a few words, O judges, begged your favourable construction.
All through our former speech we had your attention very carefully given to us.
It was very pleasing to us;
but it will be far more pleasing, if you will be so kind as to attend to what follows; because in all the things which were said before, there was some pleasure arising from the very variety and novelty of the subjects and of the charges. Now we are going to discuss the affair of corn; which indeed in the greatness of the iniquity exceeds nearly all the other charges, but will have far less variety and agreeableness in the discussion.
But it is quite worthy of your authority and wisdom, O judges, in the matter of careful hearing, to give no less weight to conscientiousness in the discharge of your duties, than to pleasure.
I, inquiring into this charge respecting the corn, keep this in view, O judges, that you are going to inquire into the estates and fortunes of all the Sicilians into the property of all the Roman citizens who cultivate land in Sicily into the revenues handed down to you by your ancestors into the life and sustenance of the Roman people.
And if these matters appear to you important yes, and most important, do not be weary if they are pressed upon you from various points of view, and at some length.
It cannot escape the notice of any one of you, O judges, that all the advantage and desirableness of Sicily, which is in any way connected with the convenience of the Roman people, consists mainly in its corn; for in other respects we are indeed assisted by that province, but as to this article, we are fed and supported by it.
The case, O judges, will be divided under three heads in my accusation: for, first, I shall speak of the collectors of the tenths; secondly, of the corn which has been bought; thirdly, of that which has been valued.
There is, O judges, this difference between Sicily and other provinces, in the matter of tribute derived from the lands; that in the other provinces, either the tribute imposed is of a fixed amount, which is called stipendiarium, as in the case of the Spaniards and most of the Carthaginian provinces, being a sort of reward of victory, and penalty for war; or else a contract exists between the state and the farmers, settled by the censor, as is the case in Asia, by the Sempronian law.
But the cities in Sicily were received into our friendship and alliance, retaining the same laws which they had before, and that being subject to the Roman people on the same conditions as they had formerly been subject to their own princes.
Very few cities of Sicily were subdued in war by our ancestors, and even in the case of those which were, though their land was made the public domain of the Roman people, still it was afterwards restored to them.
That domain is regularly let out to farmers by the censors.
There are two federate cities, whose tenths are not put up to auction; the city of the Mamertines and Taurominium. Besides these, there are five cities without any treaty, free and enfranchised; Centuripa, Halesa, Segesta, Halicya, and Panormus. All the land of the other states of Sicily is subject to the payment of tenths; and was so, before the sovereignty of the Roman people, by the will and laws of the Sicilians themselves.
See now the wisdom of our ancestors, who, when they had added Sicily, so valuable an assistant both in war and peace, to the republic, were so careful to defend the Sicilians and to retain them in their allegiance, that they not only imposed no new tax upon their lands, but did not even alter the law of putting up for sale the contracts of the farmers of the tenths, or the time or place of selling them;
so that they were to put them up for sale at the regular time of year, at the same place, in Sicily, in short, in every respect as the law of Hiero directed;
they permitted them still to manage their own affairs, and were not willing that their minds should be disturbed even by a new name to a law, much less by an actual new law.
And so that resolved that the farming of the tenth should always be put up to auction according to the law of Hiero, in order that the discharge of that office might be the more agreeable if, though the supreme power was changed, still, not only the laws of that king who was very dear to the Sicilians, but his name also remained in force among them.
This law the Sicilians always used before Verres was praetor.
He first dared to root up and alter the established usages of them all, their customs which had been handed down to them from their ancestors, the conditions of their friendship with us, and the rights secured to them by our alliance.
And in this, this is the first thing I object to and accuse you for, that in a custom of such long standing, and so thoroughly established, you made any innovation at all.
Have you ever gained anything by this genius of yours?
Were you superior in prudence and wisdom to so many wise and illustrious men who governed that province before you?
That is your renown; this praise is due to your genius and diligence.
I admit and grant this to you.
I do know that, at Rome, when you were praetor, you did transfer by your edict the possession of inheritance from the children to strangers, from the first heirs to the second, from the laws to your own licentious covetousness.
I do know that you corrected the edicts of all your predecessors, and gave possession of inheritance not according to the evidence of those who produced the will, but according to theirs who said that a will had been made.
And I do know too that those new practices, first brought forward and invented by you, were a very great profit to you.
I recollect, moreover, that you also abrogated and altered the laws of the censors about the keeping the public buildings in repair; so that he might not take the contract to whom the care of the building belonged; so that his guardians and relations might not consult the advantage, of their ward so as to prevent his being stripped of all his property;
that you appointed a very limited time for the work, in order to exclude others from the business; but that with respect to the contractor you favoured, you did not observe any fixed time at all.
So that I do not marvel at your having established a new law in the matter of the tenths you, a man so wise, so thoroughly practiced in praetorian edicts and censorian laws. I do not wonder, I say, at your having invented something; but I do blame you, I do impeach you, for having of your own accord, without any command from the people, without the authority of the senate, changed the laws of the province of Sicily.
The senate permitted Lucius Octavius and Caius Cotta, the consuls, to put up to auction at Rome the tenths of wine, and oil, and of pulse, which before your time the quaestors had been in the habit of putting up in Sicily; and to establish any law with respect to those articles which they might think fit.
When the contract was offered for sale, the farmers begged them to add some clauses to the law, and yet not to depart from the other laws of the censors.
A man opposed this, who by accident was at Rome at that time; your host, your host, and intimate friend, I say, O Verres, Sthenius, of Thermae, who is here present.
The consuls examined into the matter.
When they had summoned many of the principal and most honourable men of the state to form a council on the subject; according to the opinion of that council they gave notice that they should put the tenths up to auction according to the law of Hiero.
 Was it not so?
Men of the greatest wisdom, invested with the supreme authority, to whom the senate had given the whole power of making laws respecting the letting out the farming of the tributes, (and this power had been ratified by the people, while only one Sicilian objected to it,) would not alter the name of the law of Hiero, even when the measure would have been accompanied by an augmentation of the revenue;
but you, a man of no wisdom, of no authority, without any order from people or senate, while all Sicily objected, abrogated the whole law of Hiero, to the greatest injury and even destruction of the revenue.
But what law is this, O judges, which he amends, or rather totally abrogates?
A law framed with the greatest acuteness and the greatest diligence, which gives up the cultivator of the land to the collector of the tenths, guarded by so many securities, that neither in the corn fields, nor on the threshing floors, nor in the barns, nor while removing his corn privately, nor while carrying it away openly, can the cultivator defraud the collector of one single grain without the severest punishment.
The law has been framed with such care, that it is plain that a man framed it who had no other revenues; with such acuteness that it was plain that he was a Sicilian; with such severity, that he was evidently a tyrant:
by this law, however, cultivating the land was an advantageous trade for the Sicilian; for the laws for the collectors of the tenths were also drawn up so carefully that it is not possible for more than the tenth to be extorted from the cultivator against his will.
And though all these things were settled in this way, after so many years and even ages, Verres was found not only to change, but entirely to overturn them, and to convert to purposes of his own most infamous profit those regulations which had long ago been instituted and established for the safety of the allies and the benefit of the republic.
In the first instance he appointed certain men, collectors of the tenths in name, in reality the ministers and satellites of his desires; by whom I will show that the province was for three years so harassed and plundered, O judges, that it will take many years and a long series of wise and incorruptible governors to recover it.
The chief of all those who were called collectors, was Quintus Apronius, that man whom you see in court, concerning whose extraordinary wickedness you have heard the complaints of most influential deputations.
Look, O judges, at the face and countenance of the man; and from that obstinacy which he retains now in the most desperate circumstances, you may imagine and recollect what his arrogance must have been in Sicily.
This Apronius is the man whom Verres (though he had collected together the most infamous men from all quarters, and though he had taken with him no small number of men like himself in worthlessness, licentiousness, and audacity,) still considered most like himself of any man in the whole province. And so in a very short time they became intimate, not because of interest, nor of reason, nor of any introduction from mutual friends, but from the baseness and similarity of their pursuits.
You know the depraved and licentious habits of Verres.
Imagine to yourselves, if you can, any one who can be in every respect equal to him in the wicked and dissolute commission of every crimes that man will be Apronius; who, as he shows not only by his life, but by his person and countenance, is a vast gulf and whirlpool of every sort of vice and infamy.
Him did Verres employ as his chief agent in all his adulteries, in all his plundering of temples, in all his debauched banquets; and the similarity of their manners caused such a friendship and unanimity between them, that Apronius, whom every one else thought a boor and a barbarian, appeared to him alone an agreeable and an accomplished man;
that, though every one else hated him, and could not bear the sight of him, Verres could not bear to be away from him; that, though others shunned even the banquets at which Apronius was to be presents Verres used the same cup with him; lastly, that, though the odour of Apronius's breath and person is such that even, as one may say, the beasts cannot endure him, he appeared to Verres alone sweet and pleasant.
He sat next to him on the judgment-seat; he was alone with him in his chamber; he was at the head of his table at his banquets; and especially then, when he began to dance at the feast naked, while the young son of the praetor was sitting by.
 This man, as I began to say, Verres selected for his principal agent in distressing and plundering the fortunes of the cultivators of the land.
To this man's audacity, and wickedness, and cruelty, our most faithful allies and most virtuous citizens were given up, O judges, by this praetor, and were placed at his mercy by new regulations and new edicts, the entire law of Hiero, as I said before, having been rejected and repudiated. First of all, listen, O judges, to his splendid edict.
"Whatever amount of tithe the collector declared that the cultivator ought to pay, that amount the cultivator should be compelled to pay to the collector.	"
"How?"
Let him pay as much as Apronius demands?
What is this?
is the regulation of a praetor for allies, or the edict and command of an insane tyrant to conquered enemies?
Am I to give as much as he demands?
He will demand every grain that I can get out of my land.
Am I to give all?
Yes, and more too, if he chooses.
What, then, am I to do?
What do you think?
You must either pay, or you will be convicted of having disobeyed the edict.
O ye immortal gods, what a state of things is this For it is hardly credible.
And indeed.
I am persuaded, O judges, that, though you should think that all other vices are met in this man, still this must seem false to you.
For I myself, though all Sicily told me of it, still should not dare to affirm this to you, if I was not able to recite to you these edicts from his own documents in those very words as I will do.
Give this, I pray you, to the clerk; he shall read from the register.
Read the edict about the returns of property.
He says I am not reading the whole.
For that is what he seems to intimate by shaking his head.
What am I passing over?
is it that part where you take care of the interests of the Sicilians, and show regard for the miserable cultivators?
For you announce in your edict, that you will condemn the collector in eightfold damages, if he has taken more than was due to him.
I do not wish anything to be passed over.
Read this also which he requires; read every word.
The edict about the eightfold damages.
Does this mean that the cultivator is to prosecute the collector at law?
It is a miserable and unjust thing for men to be brought from the country into the forum, from the plough to the courts of justice; from habits of rustic life to actions and trials to which they are wholly unaccustomed.
When in all the other countries liable to tribute, of Asia, of Macedonia, of Spain, of Gaul, of Africa, of Sicily, and in those parts of Italy also which are so liable;
when in all these, I say, the farmer in every case has a right to claim and a power to distrain, but not to seize and take possession without the interference of the law, you established regulations respecting the most virtuous and honest and honourable class of men, that is, respecting the cultivators of the soil, which are contrary to all other laws.
Which is the most just, for the collector to have to make his claim, or for the cultivator to have to recover what has been unlawfully seized?
for them to go to trial when things are in their original state, or when one side is ruined?
for him to be in possession of the property who has acquired it by hard labour, or him who has obtained it by bidding for it at an auction?
What more?
They who cultivate single acres, who never cease from personal labour, of which class there were a great number, and a vast multitude among the Sicilians before you came as praetor, what are they to do?
When they have given to Apronius all he has demanded,
are they to leave their allotments?
to leave their own household gods?
to come to Syracuse, in order while you, forsooth, are praetor, to prosecute, by the equal law which they will find there, Apronius, the delight and joy of your life, in a suit for recovery of their property?
But so be it.
Some fearless and experienced cultivator will be found, who, when he has paid the collector as much as he says is due, will seek to recover it by course of law, and will sue for the eightfold penalty. I look for the vigour of the edict, for the impartiality of the praetor; I espouse the cause of the cultivator; I wish to see Apronius condemned in the eightfold penalty.
What now does the cultivator demand?
Nothing but sentence for an eightfold penalty, according to the edict.
What says Apronius?
He is unable to object.
What says the praetor?
He bids him challenge the judges.
Let us, says he, make out the decuries.
What decuries?
Those from my retinue; you will challenge the others.
What?
of what men is that retinue composed?
Of Volusius the soothsayer, and Cornelius the physician, and the other dogs whom you see licking up the crumbs about my judgment-seat.
For he never appointed any judge or recuperator from the proper body.
He said all men who possessed one clod of earth were unfairly prejudiced against the collectors.
People had to sue Apronius before these men who had not yet got rid of the surfeit from his last banquet.
What a splendid and memorable court!
what an impartial decision!
what a safe resource for the cultivators of the soil!
And that you may understand what sort of decisions are obtained in actions for the eightfold penalty, and what sort of judges those selected from that man's retinue are considered to be, listen to this.
Do you think that any collector, when this licence was allowed him of taking from the cultivator whatever he claimed, ever did demand more than was due?
Consider yourselves in your own minds, whether you think any one ever did so, especially when it might have happened, not solely through covetousness, but even though ignorance.
Many must have done so.
But I say that all extorted more, and a great deal more, than the proper tenths.
Tell me of one man, in the whole three years of your praetorship, who was condemned in the eightfold penalty.
Condemned, indeed!
Tell me of one man who was ever prosecuted according to your edict.
There was not, in fact, one cultivator who was able to complain that injustice had been done to him; not one collector who claimed one grain more as due to him than really was due.
Far from that. Apronius seized and carried off whatever he chose from every one. In every district the cultivators, harassed and plundered as they were, were complaining, and yet no instance of a trial can be found.
Why is this?
Why did so many bold, honourable, and highly esteemed men so many Sicilians, so many Roman knights when injured by one most worthless and infamous man, not seek to recover the eightfold penalty, which had most unquestionably been incurred?
What is the cause, what is the reason?
That reason alone, O judges, which you see, because they knew they should come off at the trial defrauded and ridiculed.
In truth, what sort of triad must that be, when three of the profligate and abandoned retinue of Verres sat on the tribunal under the name of judges? slaves of Verres, not inherited by him from his father, but recommended to him by his mistress.
The cultivator, forsooth, might plead his cause; he might show that no corn was left him by Apronius, that even his other property was seized; that he himself had been driven away with blows. Those admirable men would lay their heads together, they would chat to one another about revels and harlots, if they could catch any when leaving the praetor.
The cause would seem to be properly heard: Apronius would have risen, full of his new dignity as a knight; not like a collector all over dirt and dust, but reeking with perfumes, languid with the lateness of the last night's drinking party, with his first motion, and with his breath he would have filled the whole place with the odour of wine, of perfume, and of his person.
He would have said, what he repeatedly has said, that he had bought, not the tenths, but the property and fortunes of the cultivators; that he, Apronius, was not a collector, but a second Verres, the absolute lord and master of those men.
And when he had said this, those admirable men of Verres's train, the judges, would deliberate, not about acquitting Apronius, but they would inquire how they could condemn the cultivator himself to pay damages to Apronius.
 When you had granted this licence for plundering the cultivators to the collectors of the tenths, that is, to Apronius, by allowing him to demand as much as he chose, and to carry off as much as he demanded, were you preparing this defence for your trial, that you had promised by edict that you would assign judges in a trial for an eightfold penalty?
Even if in truth you were to give power to the cultivator, not only to challenge his judges, but even to pick them out of the whole body of the Syracusan assembly, (a body of most eminent and honourable men,) still no one could bear this new sort of injustice, that, when one has given up the whole of one's produce to the farmer, and had one's property taken out of one's hands, then one is to endeavour to recover one's property and to seek its restitution by legal proceedings.
But when what is granted by the edict is, in name indeed, a trial, but in reality a collusion of your attendants, most worthless men, with the collectors, who are your partners, and besides that, with the judges, do you still dare to mention that trial, especially when what you say is refuted, not merely by my speech, but by the facts themselves?
when in all the distresses of the cultivators of the soil, and all the injustice of the collectors, not only has no trial ever taken place according to that splendid edict, but none has ever been so much as demanded?
However, he will be more favourable to the cultivators than he appears; for the same man who has announced in his edict that he will allow a trial against the collectors, in which they shall be liable to an eightfold penalty, had it also set down in his edict, that he would grant a similar trial against the cultivators, in which they should be liable to a fourfold penalty.
Who now dares to say that this man was unfavourably disposed or hostile to the cultivators?
How much more lenient is he to them than to the collectors?
He has ordered in his edict that the Sicilian magistrate should exact from the cultivator whatever the collector declared ought to be paid to him.
What sentence has he left behind, which can be pronounced against a cultivator of the soil
It is not a bad thing, says he, for that fear to exist; so that, when the money has been exacted from the cultivator, still there will be behind a fear of the court of justice, to prevent him from stirring himself.
If you wish to exact money from me by process of law, remove the Sicilian magistrate.
If you employ this violence, what need is there of a process of law?
Moreover, who will there be who would not prefer paying to your collectors what they demand, to being condemned in four times the amount by your attendants.
 But that is a splendid clause in the edict, that gives notice that in all disputes which arise between the cultivator and the collector, he will assign judges, if either party wishes it.
In the first place, what dispute can there be when he who ought to make a claim, makes a seizure instead? and when he seizes, not as much as is due, but as much as he chooses? and when he, whose property is seized, cannot possibly recover his own by a suit at law?
In the second place, this dirty fellow wants even in this to seem cunning and wily; for he frames his edict in these words "If either wishes it, I will assign judges. "
How neatly does he think he is robbing him!
He gives each party the power of choice; but it makes no difference whether he wrote "If either wishes it," or "If the collector wishes it.
" For the cultivator will never wish for those judges of yours.	"
What next?
What sort of edicts are those which he issued to meet particular occasions, at the suggestion of Apronius?
When Quintus Septitius, a most honourable man, and a Roman knight, resisted Apronius, and declared that he would not pay more than a tenth, a sudden special edict makes its appearance, that no one is to remove his corn from the threshing-floor before he has settled the demands of the collector.
Septitius put up with this injustice also, and allowed his corn to be damaged by the rain, while remaining on the threshing-floor, when on a sudden that most fruitful and profitable edict comes out, that every one was to have his tenths delivered at the water-side before the first of August.
By this edict, it was not the Sicilians, (for he had already sufficiently crushed and ruined them by his previous edicts,) but all those Roman knights who had fancied that they could preserve their rights against Apronius, excellent men, and highly esteemed by other praetors, who were delivered bound hand and foot into the power of Apronius.
For just listen and see what sort of edicts these are.
A man, says he, "is not to remove his corn from the threshing-floor, unless he has settled all demands."
This is a sufficiently strong inducement to making unfair demands; for I had rather give too much, than not remove my corn from the threshing-floor at the proper time.	-"
But that violence does not affect Septitius, and some others like Septitius, who say, "I will rather not remove my corn, than submit to an extortionate demand. "
To these then the second edict is opposed.
You must have delivered it by the first of August.
I will deliver it then.
"Unless you have settled the demands, you shall not remove it.
" So the fixing of the day for delivering it at the waterside, compelled the man to remove his corn from the threshing floor.	"
And the prohibition to remove, unless the demand were settled, made the settlement compulsory and not voluntary.
 But what follows is not only contrary to the law of Hiero, not only contrary to the customs of all former praetors, but even contrary to all the rights of the Sicilians, which they have as granted them by the senate and people of Rome, that they shall not be forced to give security to appear in any courts of justice but their own.
Verres made a regulation that the cultivator should appear to an action brought by a collector in any court which the collector might choose.
So that in this way also gain might accrue to Apronius, when he dragged a defendant all the way from Leontini to Lilybaeum to appear before the court there, by making false accusations against the wretched cultivators.
Although that device for false accusation was also contrived with singular cunning, when he ordered that the cultivators should make a return of their acres, as to what they were sown with.
And this had not only great power in causing most iniquitous claims to be submitted to, as we shall show hereafter, and that too without any advantage to the republic, but at the same time it gave a great handle to false accusations, which all men were liable to if Apronius chose.
 For, as any one said anything contrary to his inclination, immediately he was summoned before the court on some charge relative to the returns made of his lands.
Through fear of which action a great quantity of corn was extorted from many, and vast sums were collected; not that it was really difficult to male a correct return of a man's acres, or even to make an extravagantly liberal one, (for what danger could there be in doing that?) but still it opened a pretext for demanding a trial because the cultivator had not made his return in the terms of the edict.
And you must feel sure what sort of trial that would be while that man was praetor, if you recollect what sort of a train and retinue he had about him.
What is it, then, which I wish you to understand, O judges, from the iniquity of these new edicts?
That any injury has been done to our allies?
That you see.
That the authority of his predecessors has been overruled by him?
He will not dare to deny it.
 That Apronius had such great influence while he was praetor?
That he must unavoidably confess.
But perhaps you will inquire in this place, as the law reminds you to do, whether he himself has made any money by this conduct.
I will show you that he has made vast sums, and I will prove that he established all those iniquitous rules which I have mentioned before, with no object but his own profit, when I have first removed out of his line of defence that rampart which he thinks he shall be able to employ against all my attacks.
I sold, says he, the tenths at a high price.
What are you saying?
Did you, O most audacious and senseless of men, sell the tenths?
Did you sell those portions which the senate and people of Rome allowed you to sell, or the whole produce; and in that the whole property and fortunes of the cultivators?
If the crier had openly given notice by your order, that there was being sold, not a tenth, but half the corn, and if purchasers had come with the idea of buying half the corn if then you had sold the half for more than the other praetors had sold the tenth part of it, would that seem strange to any one?
But what shall we say if the crier gave notice of a sale of the tenths, but if, in fact, by your regulation, by your edict, by the terms of the sale which you offered, more than a half portion Was sold?
Will you still think that creditable to yourself, to have sold what you had no right to sell for more than others sold what they fairly could?
 Oh, you sold the tenths for more than others had sold them.
By what means did you manage that?
by innocent means?
Look at the temple of Castor, and then, if you dare, talk of your innocent means.
By your diligence?
Look at the erasures in your registers at the name of Sthenius of Thermae, and then have the face to call yourself diligent.
By your ability?
You who refused at the former pleadings to put questions to the witnesses, and preferred presenting yourself dumb before them, pray call yourself and your advocates able men as much as you please.
By what means, then, did you manage what you say you did?
For it is a great credit to you if you have surpassed your predecessors in ability, and left to your successors your example and your authority.
Perhaps you had no one before you fit to imitate.
But, no doubt, all men will imitate you, the investor and first parent of such excellent methods.
 What cultivator of the soil, when you were praetor, paid a tenth?
Who paid two-tenths only?
Who was there who did not think himself treated with the greatest lenity if he paid three tenths instead of one, except a few men, who, on account of a partnership with you in your robberies, paid nothing at all?
See how great a difference there is between your harshness and the kindness of the senate.
The senate, when owing to any necessity of the republic it is compelled to decree that a second tenth shall be exacted, decrees that for that second tenth money be paid to the cultivators, so that the quantity which is taken beyond what is strictly due may be considered to be purchased, not to be taken away.
You, when you were exacting and seizing so many tenths, not by a decree of the senate, but by your own edicts and nefarious regulations, shall you think that you have done a great deed if you sell them for more than Lucius Hortensius, the father of this Quintus Hortensius, did, than Cnaeus Pompeius or Caius Marcellus sold them for; men who did not violate justice, or law, or established rules?
 Were you to consider what might be got in one year, or in two years, and to neglect the safety of the province, the well-doing of the corn interest, and the interests of the republic in future times,
though you came to the administration of affairs when matters were so managed that sufficient corn was supplied to the Roman people from Sicily, and still it was a profitable thing for the cultivators to plough and till their land? What have you brought about? What have you gained?
In order that, while you were praetor, some addition might be made to the revenue derived from the tenths, you have caused the allotments of land to be deserted and abandoned.
Lucius Metellus succeeded you.
Were you more innocent than Metellus?
Were you more desirous of credit and honour?
For you were seeking the consulship, but Metellus neglected the renown which he had inherited from his father and his grandfather.
He sold the tenths for much less, not only than you had done, but even than those had who had sold them before you. I ask, if he himself could not contrive any means for selling them at the best possible price, could he not follow in the fresh steps of you the very last praetor, so as to use your admirable edicts and regulations, invented and devised by you their author?
 But he thought that he should not at all be a Metellus if he imitated you in anything; he who when he thought that he was to go to that province sent letters to the cities of Sicily from Rome, a thing which no one in the memory of man ever did before, in which he exhorts and entreats the Sicilians to plough and sow their land for the service of the Roman people.
He begs this some time before his arrival, and at the same time declares that he will sell the tenths according to the law of Hiero; that is to say, that in the whole business of the tenths he will do nothing like that man.
And he writes this, not from being impelled by any covetousness to send letters into the province before his time, but out of prudence, lest, if the seed-time passed, we should have not a single grain of corn in the province of Sicily. See Metellus's letters.
 Read the letter of Lucius Metellus.
The letters of Lucius Metellus.
It is these letters, O judges, of Lucius Metellus, which you have heard, that have raised all the corn that there in this year in Sicily. No one would have broken one clod of earth in all the land of Sicily subject to the payment of tenths, if Metellus had not sent this letter.
What?
Did this idea occur to Metellus by inspiration, or had he his information from the Sicilians who had come to Rome in great numbers, and from the traders of Sicily?
And who is ignorant what great crowds of them assembled at the door of the Marcelli, the most ancient patrons of Sicily? what crowds of them thronged to Cnaeus Pompeius, the consul elect, and to the rest of the men connected with the province?
And such a thing never yet took place in the instance of any one, as for a man to be openly accused by those people over whose property and families he had supreme dominion and power.
So great was the effect of his injuries, that men preferred to suffer anything, rather than not to bewail themselves and complain of his wickedness and injuries.
 And when Metellus had sent these letters couched in almost a supplicating tone to all the cities, still he was far from prevailing with them to sow the land as they formerly had. For many had fled, as I shall presently show, and had left not only their allotments of land, but even their paternal homes, being driven away by the injuries of that man.
I will not indeed, O judges, say anything for the sake of unduly exaggerating my charges. But the sentiments which I have imbibed through my eyes and in my mind, those I will state to you truly, and, as far as I can, plainly.
 For when four years afterwards I came into Sicily, it appeared to me in such a condition as those countries are apt to be in, in which a bitter and long war has been carried on.
Those plains and fields which I had formerly seen beautiful and verdant, I now saw so laid waste and desolate that the very land itself seemed to feel the want of its cultivators, and to be mourning for its master.
The land of Herbita, of Enna, of Morgantia, of Assoria, of Imachara, and of Agyrium, was so deserted as to its principal part, that we had to look not only for the allotments of land, but also for the body of owners.
But the district of Aetna, which used to be most highly cultivated, and that which was the very head of the corn country, the district of Leontini, the character of which was formerly such that when you had once seen that sown, you did not fear any dearness of provisions, was so rough and unsightly, that in the most fruitful part of Sicily we were asking where Sicily could be gone?
The previous year had, indeed, greatly shaken the cultivators, but the last one had utterly ruined them.
Will you dare also to make mention to me of the tenths?
Do you, after such wickedness, after such cruelty, after such numerous and serious injuries done to people, when the whole province of Sicily entirely depends on its arable land, and on its rights connected with that land; after the cultivators have been entirely ruined, the fields deserted after you have left no one in so wealthy and populous a province not only no property, but no hope even remaining;
do you, I say, think that you can acquire any popularity by saying that you have sold the tenths at a better price than the other praetors?
As if the Roman people had formed this wish, or the senate had given you this commission, by seizing all the fortunes of the cultivators under the name of tenths, to deprive the Roman people for all future time of that revenue, and of their supply of corn; and, as if after that, by adding some part of your own plunder to the total amount got from the tenths, you could appear to have deserved well of the Roman people.
And I say this, as if his injustice was to be reproved in this particular, that, out of a desire for credit to be got by surpassing others in the sum derived from tenths, he had put forth a law rather too severe, and edicts rather too stringent, and rejected the examples of all his predecessors.
 You sold the tenths at a high price.
What will be said, if I prove that you appropriated and took to your own house no less a sum than you had sent to Rome under the name of tenths?
What is there to obtain popularity for you in that plan of yours, when you took for yourself from a province of the Roman people a share equal to that which you sent to the Roman people?
What will be said if I prove that you took twice as much corn yourself as you sent to the Roman people?
Shall we still expect to see your advocate toss his head at this accusation, and throw himself on the people, and on the assembly here present?
These things you have heard before, O judges; but perhaps you have heard it on no other authority than report, and the common conversation of men.
Know now that an enormous sum was taken by him on pretences connected with corn; and consider at the same time the profligacy of that saying of his, when he said that by the profit made on the tenths alone, he could buy himself off from all his dangers.
We have heard this for a long time, O judges.
I say that there is not one of you who has not often heard that the collectors of the tenths were that mans partners.
I do not think that anything else has been said against him falsely by those who think ill of him but this.
For they are to be considered partners of a man, with whom the gains of a business are shared.
But I say that the whole of these gains, and the whole of the fortunes of the cultivators, went to Verres alone. I say that Apronius, and those slaves of Venus, who were quite a new class of farmers first heard of in his praetorship!
and the other collectors, were only agents of that one man's gains, and ministers of his plunder.
How do you prove that?
 How did I prove that he had committed robbery in the contract for those pillars?
Chiefly, I think, by this fact, that he had put forth an unjust and unprecedented law.
For who ever attempted to change all the rights of people, and the customs of all men, getting great blame for so doing, except for some gain?
I will proceed and carry this matter further.
You sold the tenths according to an unjust law, in order to sell them for more money.
Why, when the tenths were now knocked down and sold, when nothing could now be added to their sum total, but much might be to your own gains, why did new edicts appear, made on a sudden and to meet an emergency?
For I say, that in your third year you issued edicts, that a collector might summon a man before the court anywhere he liked; that the cultivator might not remove his corn from the threshing-floor, before he had settled the claims of the collector; that they should have the tenths delivered at the water-side before the first of August.
All these edicts, I say, you issued after the tenths had been sold.
But if you had issued them for the sake of the republic, notice would have been given of them at the time of selling; because you were acting with a view to your own interest, you, being prompted by your love of gain and by the emergency, repaired the omission which had unintentionally occurred.
 But who can be induced to believe this that you, without any profit, or even without the greatest profit to yourself, disregarded the great disgrace, the great danger to your position as a free man, and to your fortunes, which you were incurring, so far as, though you were daily hearing the groans and complaints of all Sicily,
though, as you yourself have said, you expected to be brought to trial for this, though the hazard of this present trial is not at all inconsistent with the opinion you yourself had formed, still to allow the cultivators of the soil to be harassed and plundered with circumstances of the most scandalous injustice?
In truth, though you are a man of singular cruelty and audacity, still you would be unwilling for a whole province to be alienated from you, for so many most honourable men to be made your greatest enemies, if your desire for money and present booty had not overcome all reason and all consideration of safety.
 But, O judges, since it is not possible for me to detail to you the sum total and the whole number of his acts of injustice, since it would be an endless task to speak separately of the injuries done to each individual, I beg you, listen to the different kinds of injustice.
There is a man of Centuripa, named Nympho, a clever and industrious man, a most experienced and diligent cultivator.
He, though he rented very large allotments, (as other rich men like him have been in the habit of doing in Sicily,) and though he cultivated them at great expense, keeping a great deal of stock, was treated by that man with such excessive injustice, that he not only abandoned his allotments, but even fled from Sicily, and came to Rome with many others who had been driven away by that man.
He then contrived that the collector should assert that Nympho had not made a proper return of his number of acres, according to that notable edict, which had no other object except making profit of this sort.
 As Nympho wished to defend himself in a regular action, he appoints some excellent judges, that same physician Cornelius, (his real name is Artemidorus, a citizen of Perga, under which name he had formerly in his own country acted as guide to Verres, and as prompter in his exploit of plundering the temple of Diana,) and Volusius the soothsayer, and Valerius the crier.
Nympho was condemned before he had fairly got into court.
In what penalty?
perhaps you will ask, for there was no fixed sum mentioned in the edict In the penalty of all the corn which was on his threshing-floors.
So Apronius the collector takes, by a penalty for violating an edict, and not by any rights connected with his farming the revenue not the tenth that was due, not corn that had been removed and concealed, but seven thousand medimni of wheat from the allotments of Nympho.
A farm belonging to the wife of Xeno Menenius, a most noble man, had been let to a settler. The settler, because he could not bear the oppressive conduct of the collectors, had fled from his land.
Verres gave his favourite sentence of condemnation against Xeno for not having made a return of his acres.
Xenosaid that it was no business of his; that the farm was let.
Verres ordered a trial to take place according to this formula, "If it should appear" that there were more acres in the farm than the settler had returned, then Xeno was to be condemned.
He said not only that he had not been the cultivator of the land, which was quite sufficient, but also that he was neither the owner of that farm, nor the lessor of it; that it belonged to his wife; that she herself transacted her own affairs; that she had let the land.
A man of the very highest reputation, and of the greatest authority, defended Xeno, Marcus Cossetius.
Nevertheless Verres ordered a trial, in which the penalty was fixed at eighty thousand sesterces.
Xeno, although he saw that judges were provided for him out of that band of robbers, still said that he would stand the trial.
Then that fellow, with a loud voice, so that Xeno might hear it, orders his slaves of Venus to take care the man does not escape while the trial is proceeding, and as soon as it is over to bring him before him.
And at the same time he said also, that he did not think that, if from his riches he disregarded the penalty of a conviction, he would also disregard the scourge.
He, under the compulsion of this violence and this fear, paid the collectors all that Verres commanded.
There is a citizen of Morgentia, named Polemarchus, a virtuous and honourable man.
He, when seven hundred medimni were demanded as the tenths due on fifty acres, because he refused to pay them, was summoned before the praetor at his own house; and, as he was still in bed, he was introduced into his bed-chamber, into which no one else was admitted, except his woman and the collector.
There he was beaten and kicked about till, though he had refused before to pay seven hundred medimni, he now promised a thousand.
Eubulides Grosphus is a man of Centuripa, a man above all others of his city, both for virtue and high birth, and also for wealth.
They left this man, O judges, the most honourable man of a most honourable city, not merely only so much corn, but only so much life as pleased Apronius. For by force, by violence, and by blows, he was induced to give corn, not as much as he had, but as much as was demanded of him, which was even more.
 Sostratus, and Numenius, and Nymphodorus, of the same city, three brothers of kindred sentiments, when they had fled from their lands because more corn was demanded of them than their lands had produced, were treated thus, Apronius collected a band of men, came into their allotments, took away all their tools, carried off their slaves, and drove off their live stock.
Afterwards, when Nymphodorus came to Aetna to him, and begged to have his property restored to him, he ordered the man to be seized and hung up on a wild olive, a tree which is the forum there; and an ally and friend of the Roman people, a settler and cultivator of your domain, hung suspended from a tree in a city of our allies, and in the very forum, for as long a period as Apronius chose.
 I have now been recounting to you, O judges, the species of countless injuries which he has wrought, one of each sort. An infinite host of evil actions I pass over.
Place before your own eyes, keep in your minds, these invasions by collectors of the whole of Sicily, their plunderings of the cultivators of the soil, the harshness of this man, the absolute reign of Apronius.
He despised the Sicilians; he did not consider them as men, he thought that they would not be vigorous in avenging themselves, and that you would treat their oppression lightly.
Be it so.
He adopted a false opinion about them, and a very injurious one about you.
But while he deserved so ill of the Sicilians, at least, I suppose, he was attentive to the Roman citizens; he favoured them; he was wholly devoted to securing their good-will and favour?
He attentive to the Roman citizens?
There were no men to whom he was more severe or more hostile.
I say nothing of chains, of imprisonment, of scourgings, of executions.
I say nothing even of that cross which he wished to be a witness to the Roman citizens of his humanity and benevolence to them.
I say nothing, I say, of all this, and I put all this off to another opportunity.
I am speaking about the tenths, about the condition of the Roman citizens in their allotments; and how they were treated you heard from themselve, judges.
They have told you that their property was taken from them.
But since there was such a cause for it as there was, these things are to he endured, I mean, the absence of all influence in justice, of all influence in established customs.
There are, in short, no evils, O judges, of such magnitude that bravo men, of great and free spirit, think them intolerable.
What shall we say if, while that man was praetor, violent hands were, without any hesitation, laid by Apronius on Roman knights, who were not obscure, nor unknown, but honourable, and even illustrious?
What more do you expect? What more do you think I can say?
Must I pass as quickly as possible from that man and from his actions, in order to come to Apronius, as, when I was in Sicily, I promised him that I would do?
who detained for two days in the public place at Leontini, Caius Matrinius, a man, O judges, of the greatest virtue, the greatest industry, the highest popularity.
Know, O judges, that a Roman knight was kept two days without food, without a roof over his head, by a man born in disgrace, trained in infamy, practiced in accommodating himself to all Verres's vices and lusts; that he was kept and detained by the guards of Apronius two days in the forum at Leontini, and not released till he had agreed to submit to his terms.
For why, O judges, should I speak of Quintus Lollius, a Roman knight of tried probity and honour?
(the matter which I am going to mention is clear, notorious, and undoubted throughout all Sicily;) who, as he was a cultivator of the domain in the district of Aetna, and as his farm belonged to Apronius's district as well as the rest, relying on the ancient authority and influence of the equestrian order, declared that he would not pay the collectors more than was due from him to them.
His words are reported to Apronius.
He laughed, and marveled that Lollius had heard nothing of Matrinius or of his other actions.
He sends his slaves of Venus to the man.
Remark this also, that a collector had officers appointed to attend him by the praetor; and see if this is a slight argument that he abused the name of the collectors to purposes of his own gain.
Lollius is brought before Apronius by the slaves of Venus, and dragged along, at a convenient moment, when Apronius had just returned from the palaestra, and was lying on a couch which he had spread in the forum of Aetna Lollius is placed in the middle of that seemly banquet of gladiators.
 I would not, in truth, O judges, believe the things which I am now saying although I heard them commonly talked about, if the old man had not himself told them to me in the most solemn manner, when he was with tears expressing his thanks to me and to the willingness with which I had undertaken this accusation.
A Roman knight, I say, nearly ninety years old, is placed in the middle of Apronius's banquet, while Apronius in the meantime was rubbing his head and face with ointment.
What is this, Lollius, says he; "cannot you behave properly, unless you are compelled by severe measures?"
What was the man to do?
should he hold his tongue, or answer him?
In truth he, a man of that bright character, and that age, did not know what to do.
Meantime Apronius called for supper and wine; and his slaves, who were of no better manners than their master, and were born of the same class and in the same rank of life, brought these things before the eyes of Lollius.
The guests began to laugh, Apronius himself roared; unless, perchance, you suppose that he did not laugh in the midst of wine and feasting, who even now at the time of his danger and ruin cannot suppress his laughter.
Not to detain you too long; know, O judges, that Quintus Lollius, under the compulsion of these insults, came into the terms and conditions of Apronius.
 Lollius, enfeebled by old age and disease, could not come to give his evidence.
What need have we of Lollius?
There is no one who is ignorant of this, no one of your own friends, no one who is brought forward by you, no one at all who, if he is asked, will say that he now hears this for the first time.
Marcus Lollius, his son, a most excellent young man, is present; you shall hear what he says
For Quintus Lollius, his son, who was the accuser of Calidius, a young man both virtuous and bold, and of the highest reputation for eloquence, when being excited by these injuries and insults he had set out for Sicily, was murdered on the way;
and the crime of his death is imputed indeed to fugitive slaves; but, in reality, no one in Sicily doubts that he must be murdered because he could not keep to himself his intentions respecting Verres.
He, in truth, had no doubt that the man who, under the prompting of a mere love of justice, had already accused another, would be ready as an accuser for him on his arrival, when he was stimulated by the injuries of his father, and indignation at the treatment received by his family.
 Do you now thoroughly understand, O judges, what a pest, what a barbarian has been let loose in your most ancient, most loyal, and nearest province?
Do you see now on what account Sicily, which has before this endured the thefts, and rapine, and iniquities, and insults of so many men, has not been able to submit to this unprecedented, and extraordinary, and incredible series of injuries and insults?
All men are now aware why the whole province sought out that man as a defender of its safety, from the effects of whose good faith, and diligence, and perseverance Verres could not possibly be saved.
You have been present at many trials, you know that many guilty and wicked men have been impeached within your own recollection, and that of your ancestors.
Have you ever seen any one, have you ever heard of any one, who has lived in the practice of such great, such open robberies, of such audacity, of such shameless impudence?
 Apronius had his attendants of Venus about him; he took them with him about the different cities; he ordered banquets to be prepared and couches to be spread for him at the public expense, and to be spread for him in the forum.
Thither he ordered most honourable men to be summoned, not only Sicilians, but even Roman knights, so that men of the most thoroughly proved honour were detained at his banquet, when none but the most impure and profligate men would join him in a banquet.
Would you, O most profligate and abandoned of all mortals, when you knew these things, when you were hearing of them every day, when you were seeing them, would you ever have allowed or endured that such things should have taken place, to your own great danger, if they had taken place without enormous profit to yourself?
Was it the profit made by Apronius, and his most beastly conversation, and his flagitious caresses, that had such influence with you, that no care for or thought of your own fortunes ever touched your mind?
 You see, O judges, what sort of conflagration, and how vast a torrent of collectors spread itself with violence, not only over the fields but also over all the other property of the cultivators; not only over the property, but also over the rights of liberty and of the state.
You see some men suspended from trees; others beaten and scourged; others kept as prisoners in the public place; others left standing alone at a feast; others condemned by the physician and crier of the praetor; and nevertheless the property of all of them is carried off from the fields and plundered at the same time.
What is all this?
Is this the rule of the Roman people?
Are these the laws of the Roman people, judges? are these their tribunals?
are these their faithful allies? is this their suburban province?
Are not rather all these things such that even Athenio would not have done them if he had been victorious in Sicily?
I say, O judges, that the evidence of fugitive slaves would not have equalled one quarter of the wickedness of that man.
In this manner did he behave to individuals.
What more shall I say?
How were cities treated in their public capacity?
You have heard many statements and testimonies from some cities, and you shall hear them from the rest.
 And first of all, listen to a brief tale concerning the people of Agyrium, a loyal and illustrious people.
The state of Agyrium is among the first in all Sicily for honour; a state of men wealthy before this man came as praetor, and of excellent cultivators of the soil.
When this same Apronius had purchased the tenths of that district, he came to Agyrium;
and when he had come thither with his regular attendants that is to say, with threats and violence, he began to ask an immense sum, so that when he had got his profit, he might depart.
He said that he did not wish to have any trouble, but that, when he had got his money, he would depart as soon as possible to some other city.
All the Sicilians are not contemptible men, if only our magistrates leave them alone; but they are many, of sufficient courage, and very economical and temperate, and among the very first is this city of which I am now speaking, O judges.
 Therefore the men of Agyrium make answer to this most worthless man, that they will give him the tenths which are due from them, that they will not add to them any profit for himself, especially since he had bought them an excellent bargain.
Apronius informs Verres, whose business it ready was, what was going on.
Immediately, as if there had been some conspiracy at Agyrium formed against the republic, or as if the lieutenant of the praetor had been assaulted, the magistrates and five principal citizens are summoned from Agyrium at his command.
They went to Syracuse.
Apronius is there.
He says that those very men who had come had acted contrary to the praetor's edict.
They asked, in what?
He answered, that he would say in what before the judges.
He, that most just man, tried to strike his old terror into the wretched Agyrians; he threatened that he would appoint their judges out of his own retinue.
The Agyrians, being very intrepid men, said that they would stand the trial.
 That fellow put on the tribunal Artemidorus Cornelius, the physician, Valerius, the crier, Tlepolemus, the painter, and judges of that sort; not one of whom was a Roman citizen, but Greek robbers of temples, long since infamous, and now all Corneliuses.
The Agyrians saw that whatever charge Apronius brought before whose judges, he would very easily prove; but they preferred to be convicted, and so add to his unpopularity and infamy, rather than accede to his conditions and terms.
They asked what formula would be given to the judges on which to try them?
He answered, "If it appeared that they had acted contrary to the edict," on which formula he said that he should pronounce judgment.
They preferred trying the question according to a most unjust formula, and with most profligate judges, rather than come to any settlement with him of their own accord.
He sent Timarchides privately to them, to warn them, if they were wise, to settle the matter.
They refused.
"What, then, will you do?"
Do you prefer to be convicted each of you in a penalty of fifty thousand sesterces?"
They said they did.
Then he said out loud, in the hearing of every one, "Whoever is condemned, shall be beaten to death with rods.
" On this they began with tears to beg and entreat him to be allowed to give up their cornfields, and all their produce, and their allotments, when stripped of everything, to Apronius, and to depart themselves without insult and annoyance.	"
 These were the terms, O judges, on which Verres sold the tenths.
Hortensius may say, if he pleases, that Verres sold them at a high price.
This was the condition of the cultivators of the soil while that man was praetor; that they thought themselves exceedingly well off, if they might give up their fields when stripped of everything to Apronius, for they wished to escaped the many crosses which were set before their eyes.
Whatever Apronius had declared to be due, that they were forced to give, according to the edict.
Suppose he declared more was due than the land produced?
Just so. The magistrates were bound, according to his own edict, to compel the payment.
Well, but the cultivators could recover.
Yes, but Artemidorus was the judge.
What next? What happened if the cultivator had given less than Apronius had demanded?
A prosecution of the cultivator to recover a fourfold penalty.
Before judges taken from what body?
From that admirable retinue of most honourable men in attendance on the praetor.
What more?
I say that you returned less than the proper number of acres: select judges for the matter which is to be tried, namely, your violation of the edict.
Out of what class?
Out of the same retinue.
What will be the end of it?
If you are convicted, (and what doubt can there be about a conviction with those judges?)
you must be beaten to death with rods.
When these are the rules, these the conditions, will there be any one so foolish as to think that what was sold were the tenths?
Who believes that nine parts were left to the cultivator? Who does not perceive that that fellow considered as his own gain and plunder the property and possessions and fortunes of the cultivators?
From fear of the gods the Agyrians said that they would do what they were commanded to.
 Listen now to what his orders were; and conceal, if you can, that you are aware of what all Sicily well knew, that the praetor himself was the farmer of the tenths, or rather the lord and sovereign of all the allotments in the province.
He orders the Agyrians to take the tenths themselves in the name of their city, and to give a compliment to Apronius.
If he had bought them at a high price, since you are a man who inquired into the proper price with great diligence, who, as you say, sold them at a high price, why do you think that a compliment ought to be added as a present to the purchaser?
Be it so; you did think so. Why did you order them to add it?
What is the meaning; of taking and appropriating money, for which the law has a hold on you, if this is not it, I mean the compelling men by force and despotic power against their will to give a compliment to another, that is to say, to give him money?
 Well, what comes next?
If they were ordered to give some small compliment to Apronius, the delight of the praetor's life, suppose that it was given to Apronius, if it seems to you the compliment to Apronius, and not the plunder of the praetor.
You order them to take the tenths; to give Apronius a compliment, thirty-three thousand medimni of wheat.
What is this?
One city is compelled by the command of the praetor to give to the Roman people out of one district almost food enough to support it for a month.
Did you sell the tenths at a high price, when such a compliment was given to the collector?
In truth, if you had inquired carefully into the proper price, then when you were selling them, they would rather have given ten thousand medimni more then, than six hundred thousand sesterces afterwards.
It seems a great booty.
Listen to what follows, and remark it carefully, so as to be the less surprised that the Sicilians, being compelled by their necessity, entreated aid from their patrons, from the consuls, from the senate, from the laws, from the tribunals.
 To pay Apronius for testing the wheat which was given to him, Verres orders the Agyrians to pay Apronius three sesterces for every medimnus. What is this?
When such a quantity of corn has been extorted and exacted under the name of a compliment, is money to be exacted besides for testing the corn?
Or could, not only Apronius, but any one, if corn was to be served out to the army, disapprove of the Sicilian corn, which Verres might have measured on the threshing-floor, if he had liked?
That vast quantity of corn is given and extorted at your command.
That is not enough.
Money is demanded besides.
It is paid.
That is too little.
For the tenths of barley more money is extorted. You order thirty thousand sesterces to be paid.
And so from one city there are extorted by force, by threats, by the despotic power and injustice of the praetor thirty-three thousand medimni of wheat, and besides that, sixty thousand sesterces!
Are these things obscure?
Or, even if all the world wished it, can those things be obscure
which you did openly, which you ordered in open court, which you extorted when every one was looking on?
concerning which matters the magistrates and five chief men of Agyrium, whom you summoned from their homes for the sake of your own gain, reported your acts and commands to their own senate at home; and that report, according to their laws, was recorded in the public registers, and the ambassadors of the Agyrians, most noble men, are at Rome, and have deposed to these facts in evidence.
 Examine the public letters of the Agyrians; after that the public testimony of the city.
 You have remarked in this evidence, O judges, that Apollodorus, whose surname is Pyragrus, the chief man of his city, have his evidence with tears, and said that since the name of the Roman people had been heard by and known to the Sicilians, the Agyrians had never either said or done anything contrary to the interests of even the meanest of the Roman citizens;
 but that now they are compelled by great injuries, and great suffering to give evidence in a public manner against a praetor of the Roman people. You cannot, in truth.
O Verres, invalidate the evidence of this one city by your defence; so great a weight is there in the fidelity of these men, such great indignation is there at their injuries, such great conscientiousness is there in the way in which they gave their evidence.
But it is not one city alone, but every city, that now being crushed by similar distresses pursues you with deputations and public evidence.
Let us now, in regular order, proceed to see in what way the city of Herbita, an honourable and formerly a wealthy city, was harassed and plundered by him.
A city of what sort of men?
Of excellent agriculturists, men most remote from courts of law, from tribunals, and from disputes; whom you, O most profligate of men, ought to have spared, whose interests you ought to have consulted, the whole race of whom you ought most carefully to have preserved.
In the first year of your praetorship the tenths of that district were sold for eighteen thousand medimni of wheat.
When Atidius, who was also his servant in the matter of tenths, had purchased them, and when he had come to Herbita with the title of' prefect, attended by the slaves of Verres, and when a place where he might lodge had been assigned him by the public act of the city, the people of Herbita are compelled to give him as a profit thirty-seven thousand modii of wheat, when the tenths of the wheat had been sold at eighteen thousand.
And they are compelled to give this vast quantity of wheat in the name of their city, since the private cultivators of the soil had already fled from their lands, having been plundered and driven away by the injuries of the collectors.
 In the second year, when Apronius had bought the tenths of wheat for twenty-five thousand modii, and when he himself had come to Herbita with his whole force and his whole band of robbers, the people was compelled to give him in the name of the city a present of twenty-six thousand modii of wheat, and a further gift of two thousand sesterces.
I am not quite sure about this further gift, whether it was not given to Apronius himself as wages for his trouble, and a reward for his impudence.
But concerning such an immense quantity of wheat, who can doubt that it came to that robber of corn, Verres, just as the corn of Agyrium did?
But in the third year he adopted in this district the custom of sovereigns.
They say that the barbarian kings of the Persians and Syrians are accustomed to have several wives, and to give to these wives cities in this fashion: that this city is to dress the woman's waist, that one to dress her neck, that to dress her hair;
and so they have whole nations not only privy to their lusts, but also assistants in it.
 Learn that the licentiousness and lust of that man who thought himself king of the Sicilians, was much the same.
The name of the wife of Aeschrio, a Syracusan, is Pippa, whose name has been made notorious over all Sicily by that man's profligacy, and many verses were inscribed on the praetor's tribunal, and over the praetor's head, about that woman.
This Aeschrio, the imaginary husband of Pippa, is appointed as a new farmer of the tenths of Herbita.
When the men of Herbita saw that if the business got into Aeschrio's hands they should be plundered at the will of a most dissolute woman, they did against him as far as they thought that they could go.
Aeschrio bid on, for he was not afraid that, while Verres was praetor, the woman, who would be really the farmer, would ever be allowed to lose by it.
The tenths are knocked down to him at thirty-five thousand medimni, nearly half as much again as they had fetched the preceding year.
The cultivators were utterly destroyed, and so much the more because in the preceding year they had been drained dry, and almost ruined.
He was aware that they had been sold at so high a price, that more could not be squeezed out of the people; so he deducts from the sum total three thousand six hundred medimni, and enters on the registers thirty-one thousand four hundred.
Docimus had bought the tenths of barley belonging to the same district.
This Docimus is the man who had brought to Verres Tertia, the daughter of Isidorus the actor, having taken her from a Rhodian flute-player.
The influence of this woman Tertia was greater with him than that of Pippa, or of all the other women, and I had almost said, was as great in his Sicilian praetorship as that of Chelidon had been in his city praetorship.
There come to Herbita the two rivals of the praetor, not likely to be troublesome to him, infamous agents of most abandoned women.
They begin to demand, to beg, to threaten; but though they wished it, they were not able to imitate Apronius.
The Sicilians were not so much afraid of Sicilians;
still, as they put forth false accusations in every possible way, the Herbitenses undertake to appear in court at Syracuse.
When they had arrived there, they are compelled to give to Aeschrio that is, to Pippa as much as had been deducted from the original purchase-money, three thousand six hundred modii of wheat.
He was not willing to give to the woman who was really the farmer too much profits out of the tenths, lest in that case she should transfer her attention from her nocturnal gains to the farming of the tributes.
 The people of Herbita thought the matter was settled, when that man added, "And what are you going to give out of the barley to my little friend Docimus? What are your intentions?"
He transacted all this business, O judges, in his chamber, and in his bed.
They said that they had no commission to give anything: "I do not hear you; pay him fifteen thousand sesterces.
What were the wretched men to do I or how could they refuse?
especially when they saw the traces of the woman who was the collector fresh in the bed, by which they understood that he had been inflamed to persevere in his demand.
And so one city of our allies and friends was made tributary of two most debauched women while Verres was praetor.
And I now assert that that quantity of corn and those sums of money were given by the people of Herbita to the collectors in the name of the city.
And yet by all that corn and all that money they could not deliver their fellow citizens from the injuries of the collectors.
For after the property of the cultivators was destroyed and carried off, bribes were still to be given to the collectors to induce them to depart at length from their lands and from their cities.
 And so when Philinus of Herbita, a man eloquent and prudent, and noble in his own city, spoke in public of the distress of the cultivators, and of their flight, and of the scanty numbers that were left behind, you remarked, O judges, the groans of the Roman people, a great crowd of whom has always been present at this cause.
And concerning the scanty number of the cultivators I will speak at another time.
 But at this moment a topic, which I had almost passed over, must not be altogether forgotten.
 For, in the name of the immortal gods!
how will you, I will not say tolerate, but how will you bear even to hear of the sums which Verres subtracted from the sum total?
 Up to this time there has been one man only since the first foundation of Rome, (and may the immortal gods grant that there may never be another,) to whom the republic wholly committed herself, being compelled by the necessities of the times and domestic misfortunes.
He had such power, that without his consent no one could preserve either his property, or his liberty, or his life. He had such courage in his audacity, that he was not afraid to say in the public assembly, when he was selling the property of Roman citizens, that he was selling his own booty.
All his actions we not only still maintain, but out of fear of greater inconveniences and calamities, we defend them by the public authority.
One decree alone of his has been remodeled by a resolution of the senate, and a decree has been passed, that these men, from the sum total of whose debts he had made a deduction, should pay the money into the treasury. The senate laid down this principle, that even he to whom they had entrusted everything had not power to diminish the total amount of revenue acquired and procured by the valour of the Roman people.
 The conscript fathers decided that he had no power to remit even to the bravest men any portion of their debts to the state.
And shall the senators decide that you have lawfully remitted any to a most profligate woman?
The man, concerning whom the Roman people had established a law that his absolute will should be the law to the Roman people, still is found fault with in this one particular, out of reverence for their ancient laws. Did you, who were liable to almost every law, think that your lust and caprice was to be a law to you?
He is blamed for remitting a part of that money which he himself had acquired.
Shall you be pardoned who have remitted part of the revenue due to the Roman people?
 And in this description of boldness he proceeded even much more shamelessly with respect to the tenths of the district of Segesta; for when he had knocked them down to this same Docimus, for five thousand modii of wheat, and had added as an extra present fifteen thousand sesterces, he compelled the people of Segesta to take them of Docimus at the same price in the name of their city; and you shall have this proved by the public testimony of the Segestans.
 You have heard at what price the city took the tenths from Docimus, at five thousand modii of wheat, and an extra gift. Learn now at what price he entered them in his accounts as having been sold.
The law respecting the sale of tithes, Caius Verres being the praetor.
You see that in this item three thousand bushels of wheat are deducted from the sum total, and when he had taken all this from the food of the Roman people, from the sinews of the revenue, from the blood of the treasury, he gave it to Tertia the actress?
Shall I call it rather an impudent action, to extort from allies of the state, or an infamous one to give it to a prostitute?
or a wicked one to take it away from the Roman people, or an audacious one to make false entries in the public accounts?
Can any influence or any bribery deliver you from the severity of these judges?
And if it should deliver you, do you not still see that the things which I am mentioning belong to another count of the prosecution, and to the action for peculation?
 Therefore I will reserve the whole of that class of offences, and return to the charge respecting the corn and the tenths which I had begun to speak of.
While this man was laying waste the largest and most fertile districts by his own agency, that is to say by Apronius, that second Verres, he had others whom he could send, like hounds, among the lesser cities, worthless and infamous men, to whom he compelled the citizens to give either corn or money in the name of their city.
There is a man called Aulus Valentius in Sicily, an interpreter, whom Verres used to employ not only as an interpreter of the Greek language, but also in his robberies and other crimes.
This interpreter, an insignificant and needy man, becomes on a sudden a farmer of tenths.
He purchases the tenths of the territory of Lipara, a poor and barren district, for six hundred medimni of wheat.
The people of Lipara are convoked: they are compelled to take the tenths, and to pay Valentius thirty thousand sesterces as profit.
O ye immortal gods! which argument will you take for your defence; that you sold the tenths for so much less than you might have done, that the city immediately, of its own accord, added to the six hundred medimni thirty thousand sesterces as a compliment, that is to say, two thousand medimni of wheat?
or that, after you had sold the tenths at a high price, you still extorted this money from the people of Lipara against their will?
 But why do I ask of you what defence you are going to employ, instead of rather asking the city itself what you have done.
Read the public testimony of the Liparans, and after that read how the money was given to Valentius.
The public testimony is read.
The statement how the money was paid, extracted out of the public accounts.
 Was even this little state, so far removed out of your reach and out of your sight, separated from Sicily, placed on a barren and uncultivated island, turned as a sort of crown to all your other iniquities, into a source of plunder and profit to you in this matter of corn?
You had given the whole island to one of your companions as a trifling present, and still were these profits from corn exacted from it as from the inland states?
And therefore the men who for so many years, before you came as praetor, were in the habit of ransoming their lands from the pirates, now had a price set on themselves, and were compelled to ransom themselves from you.
 What more need I say?
Was not more extorted, under the name of a compliment, from the people of Tissa, a very small and poor city, but inhabited by very hard-working agriculturists and most frugal men, than the whole crop of corn which they had extracted from their land?
Among them you sent as farmer Diognotus, a slave of Venus, a new class of collector altogether.
Why, with such a precedent as this, are not the public slaves at Rome also entrusted with the revenues?
In the second year of your praetorship the Tissans are compelled against their will to give twenty-one thousand sesterces as a compliment.
In the third year they were compelled to give thirty thousand medimni of wheat to Diognotus, a slave of Venus, as a compliment!
This Diognotus, who is making such vast profits out of the public revenues, has no deputy, no peculium at all.
Doubt now, if you can, whether this Venereal officer of Verres received such an immense quantity of corn for himself, or exacted it for his master.
 And learn this also from the public testimony of the Tissans.
The public testimony of the Tissans is read.
Is it only obscurely, O judges, that the praetor himself is the farmer, when his officers exact corn from the cities, levy money on them, take something more as a compliment for themselves than they are to pay over to the Roman people under the name of tenths?
This was your idea of equity in your command this was your idea of the dignity of the praetor, to make the slaves of Venus the lords of the Sicilian people.
This was the line drawn, these were the distinctions of rank, while you were the praetor, that the cultivators of the soil were to be considered in the class of slaves, the slaves in the light of farmers of the revenue.
What more shall I say?
Were not the wretched people of Amestratus, after such vast tenths had been imposed upon them, that they had nothing left for themselves, still compelled to pay money besides?
The tenths are knocked down to Marcus Caesius in the presence of deputies from Amestratus and Heraclius, one of their deputies, is compelled at once to pay twenty-two thousand sesterces. What is the meaning of this? What is the meaning of this booty?
of this violence?
of this plundering of the allies?
If Heraclius had been commissioned by his senate to purchase the tenths, he would have purchased them; if he was not, how could he pay money of his own accord?
He reports to his fellow citizens that he has paid Caesius this money.
Learn his report from his letters.
 Read extracts from the public letters.
By what decree of the senate was this permission given to the deputy?
By none.
Why did he do so?
He was compelled.
Who says this?
The whole city.
Read the public testimony.
The public testimony.
By the same evidence you see that there was extorted from the same city in the second year a sum of money in a similar manner, and given to Sextus Vennonius.
But you compel the Amestratines, needy men, after you have sold their tenths for eight hundred medimni to Banobalis, a slave of Venus, (just notice the names of the farmers,) to add more still as a compliment, than they had been sold for, though they had been sold at a high price.
They gave Banobalis eight hundred medimni of wheat, and fifteen hundred sesterces.
Surely that man would never have been so senseless, as to allow more corn to be given out of the domain of the Roman people to a slave of Venus than to the Roman people itself, unless all that plunder had, under the name of the slave, come in reality to himself.
 The people of Petra, though their tenths had been sold at a high price, were, very much against their will, compelled to give thirty-seven thousand sesterces to Publius Naevius Turpio, a most infamous man, who was convicted of assault while Sacerdos was praetor.
Did you sell the tenths so carelessly, that, when a medimnus cost fifteen sesterces, and when the tenths were sold for three thousand medimni, that is, for forty-five thousand sesterces, still three thousand sesterces could be given to the farmer as a compliment?
Oh, but I sold the tenths of that district at a high price he boasts, forsooth, not that a compliment was given to Turpio, but that money was taken from the Petrans.
What shall I say next?
The Halicyans, the settlers among whom pay tenths, themselves have their lauds free from taxes.
Were not they also compelled to give to the same Turpio fifteen thousand sesterces, when their tenths had been sold for a hundred medimni?
If, as you are especially anxious to do, you could prove that these compliments all went to the farmers, and that none of them reached you, still these sums, taken and extorted as they were by your violence and injustice, ought to ensure your conviction;
but, as you cannot persuade any one that you were so foolish as to wish Apronius and Turpio, two slaves, to become rich at your own risk and that of your children, do you think that any one will doubt that through the instrumentality of those emissaries all this money was really procured for you?
 Again, Symmachus, a slave of Venus, is sent as farmer to Segesta, a city exempt from such taxes; he brings letters from Verres, to order the cultivators to appear in a court of some other city than their own, contrary to every resolution of the senate, to all their rights and privileges, and to the Rupilian law.
Hear the letters which he sent to the Segestans.
The letters of Caius Verres.
Now learn by one bargain made with an honourable and respected man, how this slave of Venus insulted the cultivators of the soil; for there are other instances of this sort.
 There is a man of the name of Diocles, a citizen of Panormus, surnamed Phimes, an illustrious man, and of high reputation as an agriculturist,
he rented a farm in the Segestan district, (for there are no traders in that place,) for six thousand sesterces;
after having been assaulted by this slave of Venus, he settled with him to give him sixteen thousand, six hundred, and sixty-four sesterces.
You may learn this from Verres's own accounts.
The name of Diocles of Panormus.
Anneius Brocchus also, a senator, a man of a reputation, and of a virtue with which you are all acquainted, was compelled to give money also besides corn to this same Symmachus.
Was such a man, a senator of the Roman people, a subject of profit to a slave of Venus, while you were praetor?
 Even if you were not aware that this body excelled all others in dignity, were you not at least aware of this, that it furnished the judges?
Previously, when the equestrian order furnished the judges, infamous and rapacious magistrates in the provinces were subservient to the farmers; they honoured all who were in their employ; every Roman knight whom they saw in the province they pursued with attentions and courtesies; and that conduct was not so advantageous to the guilty, as it was a hindrance to many if they had acted in any respect contrary to the advantage or inclination of that body.
This sort of principle was somehow or other diligently reserved among them as if by common consent, that whoever had thought any Roman knight deserving of any affront, was to be considered by their whole order as deserving of every possible misfortune.
Did you so despise the order of senators, did you so reduce everything to the standard of your own insults and caprices, had you so deliberated and fixed it in your own mind as an invariable rule, to reject as judges every one who dwelt in Sicily, or who had been in Sicily while you were praetor, that it never occurred to you that still you must come before judges of the same order?
in whose minds, even if there were no indignation from any personal injury done to themselves, still there would be this thought, that they were affronted in the affront offered to another, and that the dignity of their order was contemptuously treated and trampled on,
which, O judges, appears to me not to be endured with patience, for insult has in it a sting which modest and virtuous men can with difficulty put up with.
 You have plundered the Sicilians, for indeed the provincials are accustomed to obtain no revenge amid their wrongs.
You have harassed the brokers, for they seldom come to Rome, and never of their own accord.
You gave up a Roman knight to the ill-treatment of Apronius.
To be sure; for what harm can they do you now, when they cannot be judges?
What will you say when you treat senators also with the greatest violence?
what else can you say but this, "Give me up that senator also, in order that the most honourable name of senator may appear to exist not only to excite the envy of the ignorant, but also to attract the insults of the worthless. "
 Nor did he do this in the case of Anneius alone, but in the instance of every senator, so that the name of that order had not so much influence in procuring honour as insult for its members.
In the case of Caius Cassius, a most illustrious and most gallant man, though he was consul at that very time, in the first year of his praetorship, he behaved with such injustice, that, as his wife, a woman of the highest respectability, had lands in Leontini, inherited from her father, he ordered all her crops to be taken away for tenths.
You shall have him as a witness in this cause, O Verres, since you have taken care not to have him as a judge.
 But you, O judges, ought to think that there is some community of interests, some close connection existing between the members of our body; many offices are imposed on this our order, many toils, many dangers, not only from the laws and courts of justice, but also from vague reports, and from the critical character of the times; so that this order is, as it were, exposed to view, and set on an eminence, in order, as it seems, to be the more easily caught by every blast of envy.
In so miserable and unfair a condition of life, shall we not retain even the honour of not appearing vile and contemptible in the eyes of our own magistrates, when we appear before them to obtain our rights?
The men of Thermae sent agents to purchase the tenths of their district.
They thought it was much better for them, that they should be purchased by their own state at ever so high a price, than that they should get into the hands of some emissary of his.
A man of the name of Venuleius had been put up to buy them.
He did not cease from bidding.
They went on competing with him, as long as the price appeared such as could by any possibility be borne. At last they gave up bidding.
They are knocked down to Venuleius at eight thousand modii of wheat.
Possidorus, the deputy of Thermae, sends notice home.
Although it appeared to every one a most intolerable hardship, still there were given to Venuleius eight thousand modii of wheat, and two thousand sesterces besides, not to come near them.
From which it is very evident which part was the wages of the farmer, and which the booty of the praetor.
Give me the letters and testimony of the people of Thermae.
The accounts of the people of Thermae, and their evidence.
 You compelled the Imacharans after you had taken away all their corn, after they had been impoverished by your incessant injuries, miserable and ruined as they were, to pay tribute so as to give Apronius twenty thousand sesterces.
Read the decree about the tributes, and the public testimony.
The Resolution of the Senate about the tribute to be paid.
The testimony of the Imacharans.
 The people of Enna, though the tenths of the territory of Enna had been sold for three thousand two hundred medimni, were compelled to give Apronius eighteen thousand modii of wheat, and three thousand sesterces.
I entreat you to remark what an enormous quantity of corn is extorted from every district liable to the payment of tenths; for my speech extends over every city which is so liable.
And I am at present engaged about this class of injuries, O judges, in which it is not a case of single cultivators being stripped of all their property, but of compliments being exacted from the public treasury of each city, for the farmers, in order that at last they may depart from the lands and cities glutted and satiated with this immense heap of gain.
Why in the third year of your praetorship did you order the Calactans to carry the tenths of their land, which they had been accustomed to pay at Calacta, to Marcus Caesius the farmer of Amestratus,
a thing which they had never done before you were praetor, and which you yourself had never ordered in the two years preceding?
Why was Theomnastus the Syracusan sent by you into the district of Mutyca,
where he so harassed the cultivators, that for their second teethe they were unavoidably forced to buy wheat, because they had actually none of their own, (a thing which I shall prove happened also in the case of other cities.)
But now, from the agreements made with the people of Hybla, which were made with the farmer Cnaeus Sergius, you will perceive that six times as much corn as was sown was exacted of the cultivators
Read the accounts of the sowings and the agreements, extracted from the public registers.
 Listen also to the returns of the sowings, and the agreements of the men of Mena with that slave of Venus.
 Will you, O judges, endure that a great deal more than has been produced should be exacted from our allies, from the cultivators of the domain of the Roman people, from those who are labouring for you, are in your service, who are so eager that the Roman people should be fed by them, that they only retain for themselves and their children enough for their actual subsistence, and should be exacted too with the greatest violence, and the most bitter insults?
 I feel, O judges, that I must now set some bounds to the length of my speech, and that I must avoid wearying you.
I will no longer dwell on one kind of injury alone, and I will leave the other instances out of my speech, though they will still make a part of my accusation.
You shall hear the complaints of the Agregentines, most gallant, and most industrious men; you shall become acquainted, O judges, with the sufferings and the injuries of the Entellans, a people of the greatest perseverance and the greatest industry; the wrongs of the men of Heraclea, and Gela, and Solentum shall be mentioned:
you shall be told of the fields of the Catanians, a most wealthy people and most friendly to us, ravaged by Apronius: you shall be made aware that the cities of Tyndaris, that most noble city, of Cephalaedis, of Halentia, of Apollonia, of Enguina, of Capitia, have been ruined by the iniquity of these farmers; that actually nothing is left to the citizens of Ina, of Murgentia, of Assoria, of Elorum, of Enna, and of Ietum; that the people of Cetaria and Acheria, small cities, are wholly crushed and destroyed; in short, that all the lands liable to the payment of tenths have been for three years tributary to the Roman people, to the extent of one tenth of their produce, and to Caius Verres to the extent of all the rest; that to most of the cultivators nothing at all is left, that if anything was either remitted to or left to any one, it was only just so much as remained of that property by which the avarice of that man had bees satiated.
I have reserved the territories of two cities, O judges, to speak of last, the best and noblest of all, the territory of Aetna and that of Leontini: I will say nothing of the gains made out of these districts in his three years; I will select one year in order that I more easily may be able to explain what I have settled to mention.
I will take the third year, because it is both the most recent, and because it has been managed by him in such a way that, since he knew that he was certainly going to depart, he evidently did not care if he left behind him not one cultivator of the soil in all Sicily.
We will speak of the tenths of the territory of Aetna and Leontini.
Give heed, O judges, carefully.
The lands are fertile; it is the third year; Apronius is the farmer.
I will speak a little of the people of Aetna; for they themselves at the former pleading spoke in the name of their city.
You recollect that Artemidorus of Aetna, the chief of that deputation, said, in the name of his city, that Apronius had come to Aetna with the slaves of Venus;
that he had summoned the magistrates before him; that he had ordered a couch to be spread for him in the middle of the forum; that he was accustomed every day to feast not only in public, but at the public expense;
that, when at those feasts the concert began to sound, and slaves began to serve him with wine in large goblets, then he used to detain the cultivators of the soil, and not only with injustice, but even with insolence, to extort, from them whatever quantity of corn he had ordered them to supply.
 You heard all these things, O judges, all which I now pass by and leave unnoticed.
I say nothing of the luxury of Apronius, nothing of his insolence, nothing of his unexampled profligacy and wickedness;
I will only speak of the gain and profit made out of one district in one year, so that you may the more easily be able to form your conjectures of the whole three years and of the whole of Sicily;
but I do not mean to say much about the people of Aetna, for they have come hither themselves, they have brought with them their public documents; they have proved to you what gains were made by that honest man, the intimate friend of the praetor, Apronius.
I pray of you learn this from their own testimony.
Read.
The testimony of the people of Aetna.
What are you saying?
Speak, speak, I pray you, louder, that the Roman people may hear about its revenues, its cultivators of the soil, its allies, and its friends.
"Three hundred thousand medimni; and fifty thousand sesterces.	"
" Oh, the immortal gods!	-"
Does one district in one year years three hundred thousand modii of wheat, and fifty thousand sesterces besides, as a compliment to Apronius?
Did the tenths sell for so much less than they were really worth?
or, though they had been sold at a sufficiently high price, was such a quantity of corn and money nevertheless exacted by main force from the cultivators?
For whichever of these you say was the truth, blame and criminality will attach to it.
 For you certainly will not say (what I wish you would say) that this quantity never came to Apronius.
So I will hold you here, not only by the public covenants and letters, but also from the private ones of the cultivators, so as to let you understand that you were not mere diligent in executing robberies, than I have been in detecting them.
Will you be able to bear this?
Will any one defend you?
Will these men be able to endure this, if they are inclined to pronounce a sentence favourable to you, that Quintus Apronius, at one visit, out of one district, (besides all the money which was paid him, and which I have mentioned,) should have taken three hundred thousand modii of wheat, under the name of a compliment?
 What!
are they the men of Aetna alone who say this?
Yes, the Centuripans also, who are in occupation of far the largest part of the Aetnaean district, to whose ambassadors, most noble men, Andron and Artemon, their senate gave commissions which had reference to their city in his public capacity, concerning those injuries which the citizens of Centuripa sustained not in their own territories, but in those of others.
The senate and people of Centuripa did not choose to send ambassadors; but the Centuripan cultivators of the soil, which is the greatest body of such men in Sicily, a body of most honourable and most wealthy men, themselves selected three ambassadors, fellow citizens of their own, in order that by their evidence you might be made aware of the calamities, not of one district only, but of almost all Sicily.
For the Centuripans are engaged as cultivators of the soil in almost every part of Sicily.
And they are the more important and the more trustworthy witnesses against you, because, the other cities ore influenced by their own distresses alone, the Centuripans as they occupy land in almost every district, have felt the injuries and wrongs of the other cities also.
But as I have said, the case of the men of Aetna is clear enough, and established both by public and by private documents.
The task allotted to my diligence is to be required of me rather in the district of Leontini, for this reason, because the Leontini themselves have not assisted me much by their public authority. Nor, in truth, while that fellow was praetor, did these injuries of the farmers very greatly affect them, or rather, I might say, they did them good.
This may, perhaps, appear a marvellous or even an incredible thing to you, that in such general distress of the cultivators of the soil, the Leontini, who were the heads of the corn interest, should have been free from injury and calamity.
This is the reason, O judges, that in the territory of Leontini, no one of the Leontini, with the exception of the single family of Mnasistratus, occupies any land.
And so, O judges, you shall hear the evidence of Mnasistratus, a most honest and virtuous man. Do not expect to hear any others of the Leontini, whom not only Apronius, but whom even a tempest in their fields could not injure. They in truth not only suffered no inconvenience, but even in the rapine of Apronius they found gain and advantage.
 Wherefore, since the city and embassy of the Leontini has failed me on account of the cause which I have mentioned, I must devise a plan and contrive a way for myself by which I may get at the gain of Apronius, or even at his enormous and wicked booty.
The tenths of the Leontini territory were sold in the third year of Verres's praetorship for thirty-six thousand medimni of wheat; that is, for two hundred and twenty-six thousand modii of wheat.
A great price, O judges, a great price; and I cannot deny it.
Therefore it is certain that there must have been a loss, or at all events not a great gain to the farmers. For this very often happens to men who have taken a contract at a high rate.
 What will you think if I prove to you that, by this one purchase, there were made a hundred thousand modii of profit?
what if it was two hundred thousand?
what if three?
what if four hundred thousand was the sum?
Will you still doubt for whom that immense booty was acquired?
Will any one say that I am unfair if from the mere magnitude of the gain made I form a conjecture as to the direction of the stolen goods and plunder?
What if I prove to you, O judges, that those men who are making four hundred thousand modii of profit would have suffered a loss if your iniquity, O Verres, if judges of your retinue had not stepped in?
Can any one doubt, in a case of so much gain and so much iniquity, that you made such immense profit by dishonest means? that for such immense gains you were willing to be dishonest?
How then, O judges, am I to arrive at this knowledge of how much profit was made?
Not from the accounts of Apronius, for when I sought for them, I could not find them, and when I brought him into court, I made him deny that he kept any accounts at all.
If he was telling lies, why did he remove them out of the way, if they were likely to do you no harm?
If he really had kept any accounts at all, does not that alone prove plainly enough, that it was not his own business that he was conducting?
For it is a quality of tenths, that they cannot be managed without many papers; for it is necessary to keep an account of, and to set down in books the names of all the cultivators, and with each name the amount of their tenth.
All the cultivators made returns of their acres according to your command and regulation; I do not believe that any one made a return of a smaller quantity than he had in cultivation, when there were so many crosses, so many penalties, so many judges of that retinue before his eyes.
On an acre of Leontini ground about a medimnus of wheat is usually sown, according to the regular and constant allowance of seed. The land returns about eightfold on a fair average, but in an extraordinarily favourable season, about tenfold.
And whenever that is the case, it then happens that the tenth is just the same quantity as was sown; that is to say, as many acres as are sown, so many medimni are due.
 As this was the case, I say first of all, that the tenths of the territory of Leontini were sold for many more thousand medimni than there were thousands of acres sown in the district of Leontini.
But if it was impossible for them to produce more than ten medimni on an acre, and if it was fair that a medimnus should be paid out of each acre liable to the payment of tenths, when the land produced a tenfold crop, which however very seldom happened, what was the calculation of the farmer if indeed it was the tenths of the cultivator that were being sold, and no his whole property, when he bought the tenths for many more medimni than there had been acres sown?
In the Lecutini district the list and return made of acres is not more than thirty thousand. The tenths were sold for thirty-six thousand medimni.
Did Apronius make a blunder, or rather was he mad?
Yes, he would indeed have been mad if it had been lawful for the cultivators to give only what was due from them, and had not rather been compulsory on them to give whatever Apronius commanded.
 If I prove that no man gave less for his tenths than three medimni to the acre, you will admit, I suppose, that, even supposing the produce amounted to a tenfold crop, no one paid less than three tenths.
And indeed this was begged as a favour from Apronius, that they might be allowed to compound at three medimni an acre.
For, as four and even five were exacted from many people, and as many had not only not a grain of corn, but not even a wisp of straw left out of all their crop and after all their year's labour; then the cultivators of Centuripa, which are the main body of agriculturists in the Leontini district, assembled in one place. They sent as a delegate to Apronius, Andron of Centuripa, a man among the first of his state for honour and nobility, (the same man whom now the city of Centuripa has sent to this trial as a deputy and as a witness,) in order that he might plead with him the cause of the cultivators of the soil, and beg of him not to exact of the Centuripan cultivators more than three medimni for each acre.
 This request was with difficulty obtained from Apronius, as a most excessive kindness to those men who were even then safe.
And when this was obtained, this is what was obtained, forsooth, that they might be allowed to pay three tenths instead of one.
But if your own interest had not been at stake in the matter, O Verres, they would rather have entreated you not to be made to pay more than one tenth, than have begged of a promise not to be made to pay more than three.
Now, that at the present time I may pass over those rules which Apronius, in a kingly, or rather in a tyrannical spirit, made with respect to the cultivators, and that I may not at present call those men from whom he took all their corn, and to whom he left nothing not only of their corn, but nothing even of their property; just see how much gain is made of these three medimni, which he considered as a great favour and indulgence.
 The return of acres in the district of Leontini is thirty thousand.
This amounts to ninety thousand medimni of wheat that is to say, to five hundred and forty thousand modii of wheat.
Deduct two hundred and sixteen thousand modii of wheat, being what the tenths were sold for, and there remain three hundred and twenty-four thousand modii of wheat;
add to the sum total of five hundred and forty thousand modii three fiftieths, that is to say, thirty-two thousand four hundred modii of wheat, (for three fiftieths besides were exacted from every one;) this now amounts to three hundred and fifty-six thousand four hundred modii of wheat.
But I said that four hundred thousand sesterces of profit had been made.
For I do not include in this calculation those who were not allowed to compound at three medimni an acre.
But that by this present calculation I may make out the sum which I promised to do, many were compelled besides to pay two sesterces, and many even five, with each medimnus, and those who had to pay least paid a sesterce with every medimnus.
To take the least of these sums, as we calculated there were ninety thousand medimni, we must add to that, according to this new and infamous example here given, ninety thousand sesterces.
 Will he now dare to tell me, that he sold the tenths at a high price, when he took for himself more than twice as much as he sent to the Roman people out of the same district?
You sold the tenths of the Leontine district for two hundred and sixteen thousand modii of wheat?
If you did so according to law, it was a fine price; if your caprice was the law, it was a low price; if you sold them so that those were called tenths which were in reality a half, you sold them at a very low price.
For the yearly produce of all Sicily might be sold for much more, if that was what the senate or people of Rome had desired you to do.
Indeed, the tenths were often sold for as much, when they were sold according to the law of Hiero, as they have been sold for now under the law of Verres.
Let me have the accounts of the sale of tenths under Caius Norbanus.
The account of the sale of the tenths in the Leontine district under Caius Norbanus.
And yet, then, there were no trials about the return of acres; nor was Artemidorus Cornelius a judge, nor did a Sicilian magistrate exact from a cultivator whatever the farmer demanded; nor was it entreated as a favour from the farmer to be allowed to compound at three medimni an acre; nor was a cultivator obliged to give an additional present of money, nor to add three-fiftieths of corn.
And yet a area, quantity of corn was sent to the Roman people.
But what is the meaning of these fiftieths?
what is the meaning of these additional presents of money?
By what right, and, what is more, in what manner did you do this
The cultivator gave the money.
How or whence did he get it?
If he had wished to be very liberal, he would have used a more heaped up measure, as men formerly used to do in the matter of the tenths, when they were sold by fair laws, and on fair terms.
He gave the money.
Where did he get it?
from his corn?
As if, while you were praetor, he had anything to sell.
Something, then, must be taken from his principal, in order to add this pecuniary gratuity for Apronius to all the profit which he derived from the lands.
The next thing is, Did they give it willingly or unwillingly?
Willingly?
They were very fond, I suppose, of Apronius.
Unwillingly?
How, then, were they compelled to do so, except by violence and ill-treatment?
Again; that man, that most senseless man, in the selling of the tenths, caused additional sums to be added to every tenth. It was not much;
he added two or three thousand sesterces.
In the three years he made about five hundred thousand sesterces.
He did this neither according to any precedent, nor by any right; nor did he make any return of that money; nor can any man ever imagine how he is going to defend himself against this petty charge.
 And, as this is the case, do you dare to say that you sold the tenths at a high price, when it is evident that you sold the property and fortunes of the cultivators, not for the cake of the Roman people, but with a view to your own gain.
As if any steward, from a farm which had been used to produce ten thousand sesterces, having cut down and sold the trees, having taken away the buildings and the stock, and having driven off all the cattle, sent his master twenty thousand sesterces instead of ten, and made a hundred thousand more for himself.
At first the master, not knowing the injury that had been done to him, would be glad, and be delighted with his steward, because he had got so much more profit out of the farm; but afterwards, when he heard that all those things on which the profit and cultivation of his farm depends have been removed and sold, he would punish his steward with the greatest severity, and think himself very ill used.
So also, the Roman people, when it hears that Caius Verres has sold the tenths for more than that most innocent man, Caius Sacerdos, whom he succeeded, thinks that it has got a good steward and guardian over its lands and crops; but when it finds out that he has sold all the stock of the cultivators, all the resources of the revenue, and has destroyed all the hopes of their posterity by his avarice, that he has devastated and drained the allotments and the Lands subject to tribute, that he has made himself most enormous gain and booty, it will perceive that it has been shamefully treated, and will think that man worthy of the severest punishment.
 By what, then, can this be made evident?
Chiefly by this fact, that the land of the province of Sicily liable to the payment of tenths is deserted through the avarice of that man.
Nor does it happen only that those who have remained on their lands are now cultivating a smaller number of acres, but also very many rich men, farmers on a large scale, and skillful men, have deserted large and productive farms, and abandoned their whole allotments.
That may be very easily ascertained from the public documents of the states; because according to the law of Hiero the number of cultivators is every year entered in the books by public authority before the magistrates.
Read now how many cultivators of the Leontine district there were when Verres took the government.
Eighty-three.
And how many made returns in his third year?
Thirty-two.
I see that there were fifty-one cultivators so entirely got rid of that they had no successors.
How many cultivators were there of the district of Mutyca, when you arrived?
Let us see from the public documents.
A hundred and eighty-eight.
How many in your third year?
A hundred and one.
That one district has to regret eighty-seven cultivators, owing to that man's ill-treatment, and to that extent our republic has to regret the loss of so many heads of families, and demands them back at his hand, since they are the real revenues of the Roman people.
The district of Herbita had in his first year two hundred and fifty-seven cultivators; in his third, a hundred and twenty.
From this region a hundred and thirty-seven heads of families have fled like banished men.
The district of Agyrium what men lived in that land!
how honourable, how wealthy they were?
They had two hundred and fifty cultivators in the first year of your praetorship.
What had it in the third year?
Eighty, as you have heard the Agyrian deputies read from their public documents.
O ye immortal gods!
If you had driven away out of the whole of Sicily a hundred and seventy cultivators of the soil, could you, with impartial judges, escape condemnation?
When the one district of Agyrium is less populous by a hundred and seventy cultivators, will not you, O judges, form your conjectures of the state of the whole province?
And you will find nearly the same state of things in every district liable to the payment of tenths, and that those to whom anything has been left out of a large patrimony, have remained behind with a much smaller stock, and cultivating a much smaller number of acres, because they were afraid, if they departed, that they should lose all the rest of their fortunes;
but as for those to whom he had left nothing remaining which they could lose, they have fled not only from their farms, but from their cities.
The very men who have remained scarcely a tenth part of the old cultivators of the soil were about to leave all their lands too, if Metellus had not sent letters to them from Rome, saying that he would sell the tenths according to the law of Hiero;
and if he had not entreated them to sow as much land as they could, which they had always done for their own sakes, when no one entreated them, as long as they understood that they were sowing, and labouring, and going to expense for themselves and for the Roman people, not for Verres and Apronius.
 But now, O judges, if you neglect the fortunes of the Sicilians, if you show no anxiety about the treatment the allies of the Roman people receive from our magistrates, at all events undertake and defend the common cause of the Roman people.
I say that the cultivators have been driven out, that the lands subject to tribute have been devastated and drained by Verres that the whole province has been depopulated and tyrannised over. All these things I prove by the public documents of the cities, and by the private evidence of most unimpeachable men. What would you have more?
Do you wait till Lucius Metellus, who by his commands and by his power has deterred many witnesses from appearing against Verres shall himself, though absent, bear testimony to his wickedness, and dishonesty, and audacity?
I think not.
But he, who was his successor, has had the best opportunity of knowing the truth.
That is true, but he is hindered by his friendship for him.
Still, he ought to inform us accurately in what state the province is.
He ought, still he is not forced to do so.
 Does any one require the evidence of Lucius Metellus against Verres?
No one.
Does any one demand it?
I think not
What, however, if I prove by the evidence and letters of Lucius Metellus that all these things are true?
What will you say then?
That Metellus writes falsely? or that he is desirous of injuring his friend?
or that he, though he is praetor, does not know in what state the province is?
Read the letters of Lucius Metellus, which he sent to Cnaeus Pompeius and Marcus Crassus, the consuls, those which he sent to Marcus Mummius, the praetor, those which he sent to the quaestors of the city.
The letter of Lucius Metellus.
"I sold the tenths according to the law of Hiero.
" When he writes that he had sold them according to the law of Hiero, what is he writing?	"
Why, that he had sold them as all others had done, except Verres.
When he writes that he had sold them according to the law of Hiero, what is he writing?
Why, that he had restored the privileges granted to the Sicilians by the kindness of our ancestors and taken away by Verres, and their rights, and the terms on which they became our allies and friends.
He mentions at what price he sold the tenths of each district. After that what does he write?
 Read the rest of the letter.
 "The greatest pains has been taken by me to sell the tenths for as good a price as possible. "
Why then, O Metellus, did you not sell them for as much as Verres?
Because I found the allotments deserted, the fields empty, the province in a wretched and ruined condition.
What?
And as for the land that was sown, how was any one found to sow it?
Read the letters.
He says that he had sent letters, and that, when he arrived, he had given a positive promise; he had interposed his authority to prevail on them, and had all but given hostages to the cultivators that he would be in no respect like Verres
But what is this about which he says that he took so much pains?
Read "To prevail on the cultivators of the soil, who were left, to sow as largely as they could. "
Who were left?
What does this mean left?
After what war? after what devastation?
What mighty slaughter was there in Sicily, or what was there of such duration and such disaster while you were praetor, that your successor had to collect and recover the cultivators who were left?
When Sicily was harassed in the Carthaginian wars, and afterwards, in our fathers' and our own recollection, when great bands of fugitive slaves twice occupied the province, still there was no destruction of the cultivators of the soil; then, if the sowing was hindered, or the crop lost, the yearly revenue was lost too, but the number of owners and cultivators of the land remained undiminished.
Then those officers who succeeded the praetors Marcus Laevinus, or Publius Rupilius, or Marcus Aquillius in that province, had not to collect the cultivators who were left.
Did Verres and Apronius bring so much more distress on the province of Sicily than either Hasdrubal with his army of Carthaginians, or Athenio with his numerous bands of runaway slaves, that in those times, as soon as the enemy was subdued, all the land was ploughed, and the praetor had not to send letters to beg the cultivator to come to him, and entreat him to sow as much land as he could; but now, even after the departure of this most ill-omened pestilence, no one could be found who would till his land of his own free-will; and very few were left to return to their farms and their own familiar household gods, even when urged by the authority of Lucius Metellus?
 Do not you feel, O most audacious and most senseless of omen, that you are destroyed by these letters?
Do you not see that, when your successor addresses those agriculturists who are left, he writes this in express words, that they are left, not after war or after any calamity of that sort, but after your wickedness, and tyranny, and avarice, and cruelty?
Read the rest "But still in such quantities as the difficulty of the times and the poverty of the cultivators permitted. "
The poverty of the cultivators, he says.
If I, as the accuser, were to dwell so repeatedly on the same subject, I should be afraid of wearying your attention, O judges;
but Metellus cries out, "If I had not written letters.
 That is not enough
 If I had not, when on the spot, assured them. "
Even that is not enough
"The cultivators who were left," he says.
Left?
In that mournful word he intimates the condition of nearly the whole province of Sicily.
He adds, "the poverty of the cultivators.
Wait a little, O judges, wait a little, if you can, for confirmation of my speech.
I say that the cultivators have been driven away by that man's avarice: Metellus writes word that those who were left have been reassured by him.
I say that the fields have been abandoned, and the allotments deserted: Metellus writes word that there is great penury among the cultivators.
When he writes this, he shows that the allies and friends of the Roman people have been cast down, and driven off, and stripped of all their fortunes; and yet if any calamity had happened to these men by his means, even without any injury to our revenues, you ought to punish him, especially while judging according to that law which was established for the sake of the allies.
But when our allies are oppressed and ruined, and the revenues of the Roman people diminished at the same time, when our supplies of corn and provisions, our wealth, and the safety of the city and of our armies for the future is destroyed by his avarice, at least have a regard to the advantage of the Roman people, if you have no anxiety to show your regard for our most faithful allies.
 And that you may be aware that man had no consideration for either the revenue or for our posterity, in comparison with present gain and booty, see what Metellus writes at the end:
"I have taken care of the revenues for the future.
He says that he has taken care of the revenues for the future.
He would not write that he had taken care of the revenues, if he had not meant to show this, that you had ruined the revenues.
For what reason was there for Metellus taking care for the future of the revenues in respect of the tenths, and of the whole corn interest, if that man had not diverted the revenues of the Roman people to his own profit.
And Metellus himself, who is taking care of the revenues for the future, who is reassembling the cultivators of the soil who are left, what does he effect but this, to make those men plough, if they can, to whom Verres's satellite Apronius has hardly left one plough remaining, but who yet remained on their land in the hope and expectation of Metellus? What more?
What became of the rest of the Sicilians?
What became of that numerous body of cultivators who were not only driven away from their farms, but who even fled from their cities, from the province, having had all their property and all their fortunes taken from them?
By what means can they be recalled?
How many praetors of incorruptible wisdom will be required to re-establish, in process of time, that multitude of cultivators in their farms and their habitations?
 And that you may not marvel that so great a multitude has fled, as you find, from the public documents and from the returns of the cultivators, has fled, know that his cruelty and wickedness towards the cultivators was so excessive, (it is an incredible statement to make, O judges, but it is both a fact, and one that is notorious over all Sicily,) that men, on account of the insults and licentiousness of the collectors, actually killed themselves.
It is proved that Diocles of Centuripa, a wealthy man, hung himself the very day that it was announced that Apronius had purchased the tenths.
A man of high birth, Archonidas of Elorum, said that Dyrrachinus, the first man of his city, slew himself in the same way, when he heard that the collector had made a return, that, according to Verres's edict, he owed him a sum that he could not make good at the expense of all his property.
Now you, though you always were the most dissolute and cruel of all mortals, still you never would have allowed, (because the groanings and lamentations of the province brought danger on your own head,) you would never, I say, have allowed men to seek refuge from your injustice in hanging and death, if the matter had not tended to your profit and to your own acquisition of booty.
 What!
would you have suffered it?
Listen, O judges; for I must strive with all my sinews, and labour earnestly to make all men perceive how infamous, how evident, how undeniable a crime they are seeking to efface by means of money.
This is a grave charge, a serious charge, it is the most serious one which has been made in the memory of man, ever since trials for peculation and extortion were first instituted, that a praetor of the Roman people has had collectors of the tenths for his partners.
It is not the case that a private individual is now for the first time having this charge brought against him by an enemy, or a defendant by his accuser.
Long ago, while sitting on his seat of justice as praetor, while he had the province of Sicily, when he was not only feared (as is common) on account of his absolute power, but also on account of its cruelty, (which is his especial characteristic,) he heard this charge urged against him a thousand times, when it was not carelessness which delayed him from avenging it, but the consciousness of his wickedness and avarice that kept him in check.
For the collectors used to say openly, and, above all the rest, that one who had the greatest influence with him, and who was laying waste the most extensive districts, Apronius, that very little of these immense gains came to them, that the praetor was their partner.
 When the collectors were in the habit of saying this all over the province, and mixing up your name with so base and infamous a business, did it never come into your mind to take care of your own character?
Did it never occur to you to look to your liberty and fortunes?
When the terror of your name was constantly present to the ears and minds of the cultivators, when the collectors made use, not of their own power, but of your wickedness and your name to compel the cultivators to come to terms with them,
Did you think that there would be any tribunal at Rome so profligate, so abandoned, so mercenary that any protection from its judgment would be found for you?
when it was notorious that, when the tenths had been sold contrary to the regulations, the laws, and the customs of all men, the collectors, while employed in seizing the property and fortunes of the cultivators, were used to say that the shares were yours, the affair yours, the plunder yours;
and that you said nothing, and though you could not conceal that you were aware of it, were still able to bear and endure it, because the magnitude of the gain obscured the magnitude of the danger, and because the desire of money had a good deal more influence over you than the fear of judgment.
Be it so; you cannot deny the rest.
You have not even left yourself this resource, to be able to say that you heard nothing of this, that no mention of your infamy ever came to your ears;
for the cultivators were complaining with groans and tears.
Did you not know it?
The whole province was loud in its indignation.
Did no one tell you of it?
Complaints were being made of your injuries, and meetings held on the subject at Home, were you ignorant of this?
Were you ignorant of all these facts?
What?
when Publius Rubrius summoned Quintus Apronius openly at Syracuse in your hearing, at a great assembly of the people, to be bound over to stand a trial, offering to prove, "that Apronius had frequently said that you were his partner in the affair of the tenths. " Did not these words strike you? did they not agitate you? did they not arouse you to take care of your own liberty and fortunes?
You were silent; you even pacified their quarrel; you took pains to prevent the trial from coming on.
O ye immortal gods! could either an innocent man have endured this? or would not even a man ever so guilty, if it were only because he thought that there might be a trial at Rome hereafter, have endeavoured by some dissimulation to study his character in the eyes of men?
 What is the case?
A wager is offered about a matter affecting your position as a free citizen, and your fortunes.
Do you sit still and say nothing?
do not you follow up the matter?
do not you persevere?
do not you ask to whom Apronius said it? who heard him?
whence it arose? how it was stated to have happened?
If any one had whispered in your ear, and told you that Apronius was in the habit of saying that you were his partner, you ought to have been roused, to have summoned Apronius, and not to have been satisfied yourself with him, till you had satisfied the opinion of others with respect to yourself.
But when in the crowded forum, in a great concourse of people, this charge was urged, in word and presence indeed, against Apronius, but in reality against you, could you ever have received such a blow in silence, unless you had decided that, say what you would in so evident a case, you would only make the matter worse?
 Many men have dismissed quaestors, lieutenants, prefects, and tribunes, and ordered them to leave the province, because they thought that their own reputation was being injured through their misconduct, or because they considered that they were behaving ill in some particular. Would you never have addressed Apronius, a man scarcely a free man, profligate, abandoned, infamous, who could not preserve, I will not say an honest mind, but not even a pure soul, with even one harsh word, and that too when smarting under disgrace and insult yourself? And moreover, the respect due to a partnership would not have been so sacred in your eyes as to make you indifferent to the danger you were in, if you had not seen the matter was so well known and so notorious to every one.
 Publius Scandilius, a Roman knight, whom you are all acquainted with, did afterwards adopt the same legal proceedings against this same Apronius respecting that partnership, which Rubrius had wished to adopt.
He urged them on; he pressed it, he gave him no respite; security was given to the amount of five thousand sesterces;
Scandilius began to demand recuperators or a judge.
Does not this wicked praetor seem to be hemmed in now within sufficiently narrow bounds in his own province, yes, and even on his own throne and tribunal; so that he must either while present and sitting on the bench allow a trial to proceed affecting his own liberty, or else confess that he must be convicted by every tribunal in the world?
The trial is on this formula, "that Apronius says that you are his partner in the matter of the tenths.
" The province is yours; you are present, judgment is demanded from you yourself. What do you do? What do you decree?	-"
You say that you will assign judges.
You do well; though where will there be found judges of such courage as to dare, in his province, when the praetor himself is present, to decide in a manner not only contrary to his with, but adverse even to his fortunes?
 However, be it so; the case is evident;
there was no one who did not say that he had heard this distinctly; all the most respectable men were most undoubted witnesses of it; there was no one in all Sicily who did not know that the tenths belonged to the praetor, no one who had not heard Apronius frequently say so; moreover, there was a fine body of settlers at Syracuse, many Roman knights, men of the highest consideration, out of which number the judges must be selected, who could not possibly decide in any other manner.
Scandilius does not cease to demand judges; then that innocent man, who was so eager to efface that suspicion, and to remove it from himself, says that he will assign judges from his own retinue.
In the name of the good faith of gods and men, who is it that I am accusing?
in whose case am I not desirous that my industry and diligence should be proved?
What is it that I sought to effect and obtain by speaking and meditating on this matter?
I have hold, I have hold I say, in the middle of the revenues of the Roman people, in the very crops of the province of Sicily, of a thief, manifestly embezzling the whole revenue derived from the corn, an immense sum: I have hold of him; so I say that he cannot deny it.
For what will he say?
Security has been entered into for a prosecution against your agent Apronius, in a matter in which all your fortunes are at stake on the charge of having been in the habit of saying that you were his partner in the tenths.
All men are waiting to see how anxious you will be about this, how you will endeavour to give men a favourable opinion of you and of your innocence.
Will you here appoint as judges your physician, and your soothsayer, and your crier, or even that man whom you had in your train, in case there was any affair of importance, a judge like Cassius, Papirius Potamo, a severe man of the old equestrian school?
Scandilius began to demand judges from the body of settlers;
then Verres says that he will not entrust a trial in which his own character is at stake, to any one except his own people.
The brokers think it a scandalous thing for a man to protest against, as unjust to himself, that form in which they transact their business.
The praetor protests against the whole province as unjust to him.
 Oh, unexampled impudence!
Does he demand to be acquitted at Rome, who has decided in his own province that it is impossible that he should be acquitted? who thinks that money will have a greater influence over senators most carefully chosen, than fear will over three judges?
But Scandilius says that he will not say a word before a judge like Artemidorus, and still he presses the matter on, and loads you with favourable conditions, if you choose to avail yourself of them.
If you decide that, in the whole province of Sicily, no capable judge or recuperator can be found, he requires of you to refer the matter to Rome;
and on this you exclaim that the man is a dishonest man, for demanding a trial in which your character is at stake to take place in a place where he knows that you are unpopular.
You say you will not send the case to Rome.
You say that you will not appoint judges out of the body of settlers; you put forward your own retinue.
Scandilius says that he shall abandon the whole affair for the present, and return at his own time.
What do you say to that?
what do you do?
you compel Scandilius to do what?
to prosecute the matter regularly?
In a shameless manner you put an end to the long-expected trial of your character; you do not do that what do you do, then?
 Do you permit Apronius to select what judges he chooses out of your retinue?
It is a scandalous thing that you should give one of the parties a power of selecting judges from that worthless crew, rather than give both a power of rejecting judges from a respectable class.
You do neither of those things what then?
Is there anything more abominable that can be done?
Yes; for he compels Scandilius to give and pay over that five thousand sesterces to Apronius.
What neater thing could be done by a praetor desirous of a fair reputation, one who was anxious to repel from himself all suspicion, and to deliver himself from infamy?
He had been a common topic of conversation, of reproach, of abuse.
A worthless and debauched man had been in the habit of saying that the praetor was his partner.
The master had come before the courts, had come to trial; he, upright and innocent man that he was, had an opportunity, by punishing Apronius, of relieving himself from the most serious disgrace.
What punishment does he devise? what penalty for Apronius?
He compels Scandilius to pay to Apronius five thousand sesterces, as reward and wages for his unprecedented rascality, his audacity, and his proclamation of this wicked partnership.
 What difference did it make, O most audacious man, whether you made this decree, or whether you yourself made that profession and declaration concerning yourself which Apronius was in the habit of making?
The man whom, if there had been shame, yes, if there had even been any fear in you, you ought not to have let go without punishment, you could not allow to come off without a reward.
You might see the truth in every case, O judges, from this single affair of Scandilius.
First of all, that this charge about the partnership in the tenths was not cooked up at Rome, was not invented by the accuser; it was not (as we are accustomed sometimes to say in making a defence for a man) a domestic or back-stairs accusation; it was not originated in a time of your danger, but it was an old charge, bruited about long ago, when you were praetor, not made up at Rome by your enemies, but brought to Rome from the province.
 At the same time his great favour to Apronius may be clearly seen; also the, I will not say confession, but the boast of Apronius, about him.
Besides all this, you can rake as clearly proved this first, that, in his own province, he would not entrust a trim in which his reputation was at stake, to any one out of his own retinue.
Is there any judge who has not been convinced, from the very beginning of my accusation respecting the collection of tenths, that he had made an attack on the property and fortunes of the cultivators of the soil?
Who is there who did not at once decide, from what I then proved, that he had sold the tenths under a law quite novel, and, therefore, no law at all, contrary to the usage and established regulations of all his predecessors?
 But even if I had not such judges as I have, such impartial, such careful, such conscientious judges, is there any one whatever who has not long ago formed his opinion and his judgment from the magnitude of the injuries done, the dishonesty of the decrees, the iniquity of the tribunals?
Even although a man may be somewhat careless in judging, somewhat indifferent to the laws, to his duty to the republic, to our allies and friends, what then?
Can even such a man doubt of the dishonesty of that man, when he is aware that such vast gains were made, such iniquitous compromises extorted by violence and terror? when he knows that cities were compelled by violence and imperious commands, by the fear of scourges and death, to give such great rewards, not only to Apronius and to men like him, but even to the slaves of Venus?
 But if any one is but little influenced by the injuries done to our allies, if there be any one who is not moved by the flight, the calamities, the banishment, and the suicides of the cultivators of the soil; still I cannot doubt that the man who knows, both from the documents of the cities and the letter of Lucius Metellus, that Sicily has been laid waste and the farms deserted, must decide that it is quite impossible that any other than the severest judgment should be passed on that man.
Will there be any one who can conceal from himself, or be indifferent to these facts?
I have brought before you trials commenced respecting the partnership in the tenths, but prevented by that man from being brought to a decision.
What is there that any one can possibly desire plainer than this?
I have no doubt that I have satisfied you, O judges.
But I will go further; not, indeed, in order that this may be proved more completely to your satisfaction than I feel sure that it already is, but that he may at last give over his impudence, may cease at Last to believe that he can purchase these things which he himself was always ready to sell his good faith, his oath, truth, duty, and religion; that his friends may cease to keep continually saying things which may be injury, a stain, and odium, and infamy to all of us.
 But what friends are they?
Alas, the order of senators! wretched, and unpopular, and detested through the fault and unworthiness of a few!
That Alba Aemilius, sitting at the entrance of the market, should say openly that Verres had gained his cause, that he had bought the judges, one for four hundred thousand sesterces, another for five, the one who who went cheapest, for three!
And when he was answered that that was impossible; that many witnesses would give evidence, and besides, that I should not desert the cause, "Though," said he, "every one were to make every possible statement against him, still, unless the matter be brought home to him so evidently that no answer can be given, we have gained the cause.
" You say well, Alba. I will agree to your conditions.	-"
You think that conjecture avails nothing at a trial, that suspicion avails nothing, that the character of one's previous life avails nothing, nor the evidence of virtuous men, nor the authority or letters of cities.
You demand evident proof I do not ask for judges like Cassius.
I do not ask for the ancient impartiality of courts of justice.
I do not, O judges, implore your good faith, your self-respect, your conscientiousness in giving judgment.
I will take Alba for my judge; that man who is himself desirous of being considered an unprincipled buffoon: who by the buffoons has always been considered as a gladiator, rather than as a buffoon. I will bring forward such a case about the tenths that Alba shall confess that Verres, in the case of the corn, and in that of the property of the cultivators of the soil has been an open and undisguised robber.
He says that he sold the tenths of the Leontine district at a high price.
I showed at the beginning that he ought not to be considered to have sold them at a high price' who in name indeed sold the tenths, but who in reality and by the terms of the sale, and through his law, and through his edict, and through the licentiousness of the collectors, left no tenths at all to the cultivators of the soil.
I proved that also, that others had sold the tenths of the Leontine district and of other districts also, for a high price; and that they had sold them according to the law of Hiero; and that they sold them for even more than you had, and that then no cultivator had complained.
Nor indeed was there anything of which any one could complain, when they were sold according to a law most equitably framed; nor did it ever make any difference to the cultivator at what price the tenths were sold. For it is not the case that, if they be sold at a high price, the cultivator owes more, if at a low price, less. As the crops are produced, so are the tenths sold.
But it is for the interest of the cultivator, that his crops should be such that the tenths may be able to be sold at as high a price as possible.
As long as the cultivator does not give more than a tenth, it is for his interest that the tenth should be as large as possible.
 But, I imagine, you mean this to be the chief article of your defence, that you sold all the tenths at a high price, but the tenths of the Leontine district, which produces the most, for two hundred and sixteen thousand modii of wheat.
If I prove that you could have sold them for a good deal more, but that you would not knock them down to those who were bidding against Apronius, and that you adjudged them to Apronius for much less than you might have adjudged them to others; if I prove this, will even Alba, not only your oldest friend, out even your lover, be able to acquit you?
I assert that a Roman knight, a man of the highest honour, Quintus Minucius, with others like himself, was willing to add to the tenths of the Leontine district not one thousand, not two thousand, not three thousand modii of wheat, but thirty thousand modii of wheat to the tenths of one single district, and that he was not allowed to become the purchaser, that the matter might not escape the grasp of Apronius.
 You cannot by any means deny this, unless you are determined to deny everything.
The business was transacted openly, in a full assembly, at Syracuse.
The whole province is the witness, because men are accustomed to flock together thither from all parts at the sale or the tenths.
And whether you confess this, or whether it be proved against you, do you not see in what important and what evident acts you are detected.
First of all, it is proved that that business and that booty was yours.
For unless it was, why did you prefer that Acronius (who every one was saying was only managing your affairs in the matter of the tenths as your agent) should get the tenths of the Leontine district rather than Quintus Minucius?
Secondly, that an enormous and immense profit was made by you.
For if you would not have been influenced by thirty thousand modii of wheat, at all events Minucius would willingly have given thus much as a compliment to Apronius, if he had been willing to accept it.
 How great then must we suppose the expectation of booty which he entertained to have been, when he despised and scorned such vast present profit: acquired without the slightest trouble.
Thirdly, Minucius himself would never have wished to have them at such a price, if you had been selling the tenths according to the Law of Hiero; but because he saw that by your new edicts and most iniquitous resolutions he should get a good deal more than tenths, on that account he advanced higher.
But Apronius had always even a good deal more permitted to him than you had announced in your edict.
How much gain then can we suppose was made by him to whom everything was permitted; when that man was so willing to add so large a compliment, who would not have had the same licence if he had bought the tenths?
 Lastly, unquestionably that defence, under which you have constantly thought that all your thefts and iniquities could be concealed, is cut from under your feet; that you sold the tenths at a high price that you consulted the interest of the Roman people that you provided for plenty of provisions.
He cannot say this, who cannot deny that he sold the tenths of one district for thirty thousand modii less than he might have done; even if I were to grant you this, that you did not grant them to Minucius because you had already adjudged them to Apronius; for they say that that is what you are in the habit of saying, and I am expecting to hear it, and I wish you would make that defence.
But, even if it were so, still you cannot boast of this as a great thing, that you sold the tenths at a high price, when you admit that there were people who were willing to buy them at a much higher price.
The avarice, then, and covetousness of this man, his wickedness, and dishonesty, and audacity, are proved, O judges, are proved most incontestably.
What more shall I say What if his own friends and defenders have formed the same opinion that I have?
What can you have more?
On the arrival of Lucius Metellus the praetor, when Verres had made all his retinue friends of this also by that sovereign medicine of his, money, men applied to Metellus; Apronius was brought before him;
his accuser was a man of the highest consideration, Caius Gallius, a senator.
He demanded of Metellus to give him a right of action according to the terms of his edict against Apronius, "for having taken away property by force or by fear," which formula of Octavius, Metellus had both adopted at Rome, and now imported into the province.
He does not succeed; as Metellus said that he did not wish by means of such a trial to prejudge the case of Verres himself in a matter affecting his condition as a free citizen.
The whole retinue of Metellus, grateful men, stood by Apronius.
Caius Gallius, a man of our order, cannot obtain from Lucius Metellus, his most intimate friend, a trial in accordance with his own edict.
 I do not blame Metellus; he spared a friend of his a connection, indeed, as I have heard him say himself. I do not, I say, blame Metellus; but I do marvel how he not only prejudged the case of a man concerning whom he was unwilling that any previous decision should take place by means of judges, but even judged most severely and harshly respecting him.
For, in the first place, if he thought that Apronius would be acquitted, there was no reason for his fearing any previous decision.
In the second place, if Apronius were condemned, all men were likely to think that the cause of Verres was involved in his; this at all events Metellus did now decide, and he determined that their affairs and their causes were identical, since he determined that, if Apronius were condemned, it would be a prejudging of the case of Verres.
And one fact is at the same time a proof of two things; both that the cultivators gave much more than they owed to Apronius because they were constrained by violence and fear; and also, that Apronius was transacting Verres's business in his own name, since Lucius Metellus determined that Apronius could not be condemned without giving a decision at the same time respecting the wickedness and dishonesty of Verres.
I come now to the letter of Timarchides, his freedman and attendant; and when I have spoken of that, I shall have finished the whole of my charge respecting the truth
This is the letter, O judges, which we found at Syracuse, in the house of Apronius, where we were looking for letters.
It was sent, as it proves itself, on the journey, when Verres had already departed from the province; written by the hand of Timarchides
Read the letter of Timarchides:
"Timarchides, the officer of Verres, wishes health to Apronius.
Now I do not blame this which he has written, "The officer. "
For why should clerks alone assume to themselves this privilege?
Lucius Papirius the clerk, I should like this signature to be common to all attendants, lictors, and messengers.
"Be sure and be very diligent in everything which concerns the praetor's character.	"
He recommends Verres to Apronius, and exhorts him to resist his enemies;
Your reputation is protected by a very efficient guard, if indeed it depends on the diligence and authority of Apronius.
"You have virtue and eloquence.	"
" How abundantly Apronius is praised by Timarchides! How splendidly!	"
Whom ought I to expect to be otherwise than pleased with that man who is so highly approved by Timarchides?
You have ample funds.
It is quite inevitable that what there was superfluous of the gain you both made by the corn, must have gone chiefly to the man by whose intervention you transacted that business.
"Get hold of the new clerks and officers. Use every means that offer, in concert with Lucius Vulteius, who has the greatest influence.
" See now, what an opinion Timarchides has of his own dishonest cunning, when he gives precepts of dishonesty to Apronius!	"
Now these words, "Use every means in your power "
Does not he seem to be drawing words out of his master's house, suited to every sort of iniquity?
I beg, my brother, that you will trust your own little brother,
your comrade, indeed, in gain and robbery, your twin-brother and image in worthlessness, dishonesty, and audacity.
"You will be considered dear to the retinue.	"
 What does this mean, to the retinue?"
What has that to do with it?
Are you teaching Apronius?
What?
had he come into this retinue at your prompting, or of his own accord?
"Whatever is needful for each man, that employ.	"
" How great, do you suppose, must have been the impudence of that man when in power, who even after his departure is so shameless?	"
He says that everything can be done by money: you must give, waste, and spend, if you wish to gain your cause.
Even this, that Timarchides should give this advice to Apronius, is not so offensive to me, as the fact of his also giving it to his patron:
"When you press a request, all men gain their objects.
 Yes, while Verres was praetor, not while Sacerdos was, or Peducaeus, or this very Lucius Metellus.
"You know that Metellus is a wise man.	"
" But this is really intolerable, that the abilities of that most excellent man, Lucius Metellus, should be laughed at, and despised and scorned by that runaway slave Timarchides.	"
"If you have Vulteius with you, everything will be mere child's play to you.	"
" Here Timarchides is greatly mistaken, in thinking either that Vulteius can be corrupted by money, or that Metellus is going to discharge the duties of his praetorship according to the will of any one man; but he is mistaken by forming his conjectures from his own experience.	"
Because he saw that, through his own intervention and that of others, many men had been able to do whatever they pleased with Verres, without meeting with any difficulty, he thought that there were the same means of access to every one.
You did very easily whatever you wanted with Verres, and found it as easy as child's play to do so, because you knew many of the kinds of play in which he indulged.
"Metellus and Vulteius have been impressed with the idea that you have ruined the cultivators of the soil.	"
" Who attributed the action to Apronius, when he had ruined any cultivator? or to Timarchides when he had taken money for assigning a trial, or making a decree, or giving any order, or remitting any thing? or to Sextus the lictor, when he, as executioner, had put an innocent man to death?
No one.	-"
Every body at the time attributed these things to Verres; whom they desire now to see condemned.
 "People have dinned into their ears, that you were a partner of the praetor's.
" Do you not see how clear the matter both is and was when even Timarchides is afraid of this?	"
Will you not admit that we are not inventing this charge against you, but that your freedman has been this long time seeking some defence against this charge?
Your freedman and officer, one most intimate, and indeed connected with you and your children in everything, writes to Apronius, that it is universally pointed out to Metellus that Apronius had been your partner in the tenths.
"Make him see the dishonesty of the cultivators: they shall suffer for it, if the gods will.	-"
" What, in the name of the immortal gods, is the meaning of that?	-"
or on what account can we say that such great and bitter hatred is excited against the cultivators?
What injury have the cultivators of the soil done to Verres, that even his freedman and officer should attack them with so inimical a disposition in these letters?
And I would not, O judges, have read to you the letter of this runaway slave, if I had not wished you to see from it the precepts, and customs, and system of the whole household.
Do you see how he advises Apronius? by what means and by what presents he may insinuate himself into the intimacy of Metellus? how he may corrupt Vulteius?
how he may win over with bribes the clerks and the chief officer?
He teaches him what he has himself seen done.
He teaches a stranger the lessons which he has learnt at home himself.
 But in this one thing he makes a mistake, that he thinks there is the same road to every one's intimacy.
 Although I am deservedly angry with Metellus, still I will say this which is true.
Apronius could not corrupt Metellus with bribes, as he had corrupted Verres, nor with banquets, nor with women, nor with debauched and profligate conversation, by which means he had, I will not say crept into that man's friendship slowly and gradually, but had in a very short time got possession of the whole man and his whole retinue.
But as for the retinue of Metellus, which he speaks of, what was the use of his corrupting that, when no judges were appointed out of it to judge the causes of the cultivators?
 For as for what he writes, that the son of Metellus was a mere boy, he is greatly mistaken. For there is not the same access to the son of every praetor.
O Timarchides, the son of Metellus is in the province, not a boy, but a virtuous and modest youth, worthy of his rank and name.
How that boy of yours had behaved in the province, I would not say if I thought it the fault of the boy, and not the fault of his father.
Did not you, though you knew yourself and your own habits of life, O Verres, take with you your son, still clad in the robes of a boy, into Sicily, so that even if nature had separated the boy from his father's vices and from every resemblance to his family, still habit and training might prevent his degenerating from them?
 Suppose there had been in him the disposition of Caius Laelius, of Marcus Cato, still what good could be expected or extracted out of one who has lived in the licentious school of his father in such a way that he has never seen one modest or sober banquet? who since he has grown up has lived in daily revels for three years among immodest women and intemperate men?
who has never heard a word from his father by which he might become more modest or more virtuous? who has never seen his father do anything, which, if he had imitated, would not have laid him under the most disgraceful imputation of all, that of being considered like his father?
 By which conduct you have done an injury, not only to your son, but also to the republic.
For you had begotten children, not for yourself alone, but also for your country; who might not only be a pleasure to you, but who might some day or other be able to be of use to the republic.
You ought to have trained and educated them according to the customs of your ancestors, and the established system of the state; not in your crimes, in your infamy.
Were he the able, and modest, and upright son of a lazy, and debauched, and worthless father then the republic would have had a valuable present from you.
Now you have given to the state another Verres instead of yourself, if, indeed, he is not worse (If that be possible) in this respect, that you have turned out such as you are without being bred up in the school of a dissolute man, but only under a thief, and a go-between.
 What can we expect likely to turn out more complete than a person who is by nature your son, by education your pupil, by inclination your copyist?
Whom, however, I, O judges, would gladly see turn out a virtuous and gallant man.
For I am not influenced by his enmity, if, indeed, there is to be enmity between him and me; for if I am innocent and like myself in everything, how will his enmity hurt me?
And if, in any respect, I am like Verres, an enemy will no more be wanting to me than he has been wanting to him.
In truth, O judges, the republic ought to be such, and shall be such, being established by the impartiality of the tribunals, that an enemy shall never be wanting to the guilty, and shall never be able to injure the innocent.
There is, therefore, no cause why I should not be glad for that son of his to emerge out of his father's vices and infamy. And although it may be difficult, yet I do not know whether it be impossible; especially if (as is at present the case) the guardians placed over him by his friends continue to watch him, since his father is so indifferent to him, and so dissolute.
 But my speech has now digressed more than I had intended from the letter of Timarchides: and I said, that when that had been read, I would end all I had to say on the charge connected with the tenths; from which you have clearly seen that an incalculable amount of corn has been for these three years diverted from the republic, and taken illegally from the cultivators.
The next thing is, O judges, for me to explain to you the charge about the purchase of corn, a theft very large in amount, and exceedingly shameless.
And I entreat you to listen while I briefly lay before you my statements, being both certain, few in number, and important.
It was Verres's duty according to a decree of the senate, and according to the law of Terentius and to the law of Cassius about corn, to purchase corn in Sicily.
There were two descriptions of purchase, the one the purchase of the second tenths, the other the purchase of what was furnished in fair proportions by the different cities.
Of corn derived from the second tenths the quantity would be as much as had been derived from the first tenths; of corn levied on the cities in this way there would be eight hundred thousand modii.
The price fixed for the corn collected as the second tenths was three sesterces a modius; for that furnished in compliance with the levy, four sesterces.
Accordingly, for the corn furnished in compliance with the levy, there was paid to Verres each year three million two hundred thousand sesterces, which he was to pay to the cultivators of the soil; and for the second tenths, about nine millions of sesterces.
And so, during the three years, there was nearly thirty-six million six hundred thousand sesterces paid to him for this purchase of corn in Sicily.
 This enormous sum of money, given to you out of a poor and exhausted treasury; given to you for corn, that is to say, for what was necessary for the safety and life of the citizens; given to you to be paid to the Sicilian cultivators of the soil, on whom the republic was imposing such great burdens; this great sum, I say, was so handled by you, that I can prove, if I choose, that you appropriated the whole of this money, and that it all went to your own house.
In fact, you managed the whole affair in such a way that this which I say can be proved to the most impartial judge.
But I will have a regard for my own authority, I will recollect with what feelings, with what intentions I have undertaken the advocacy of this public cause. I will not deal with you in the spirit of an accuser; I will invent nothing; I do not wish any one to take for proved, while I am speaking, anything of which I myself do not already feel thoroughly convinced.
 In the ease of this public money, O judges, there are three kinds of thefts.
In the first place, he put it out among the companies from which it had been drawn at twenty-four per cent interest; in the second place, he paid actually nothing at all for corn to very many of the cities; lastly, if he did pay any city, he deducted as large a sum as ever he chose. He paid no one whatever as much as was due to him.
And first I ask you this you, to whom the farmers of the revenue, according to the letters of Carpinatius, gave thanks. Was the public money, drawn from the treasury, given out of the revenues of the Roman people to purchase corn, was it a source of profit to you?
Did it bring you in twenty-four per cent interest?
I dare say you will deny it.
For it is a disgraceful and dangerous confession to make.
 And it is a thing very difficult for me to prove,
for by what witnesses am I to prove it?
By the farmers of the revenue?
They have been treated by him with great honour they will keep silence.
By their letters?
They have been put out of the way by a resolution of the collectors.
Which way then shall I turn?
Shall I leave unmentioned so infamous a business, a crime of such audacity and such shamelessness, on account of a dearth of witnesses or of documentary proofs?
I will not do so, O judges, I will call a witness. Whom?
Lucius Vettius Chilo, a most honourable and accomplished man of the equestrian order, who is such a friend of and so closely connected with Verres, that, even if he were not an excellent man, still whatever he said against him would seem to have great weight; but who is so good a man that, even if he were ever so great an enemy to him, yet his testimony ought to be believed.
 He is annoyed and waiting to see what Vettius will say.
He will say nothing because of this present occasion; nothing of his free will, nothing of which we can think that he might have spoken either way.
He sent letters into Sicily to Carpinatius, when he was superintendent of the tax derived from the pasture lands, and manager of that company of farmers, which letters I found at Syracuse, in Carpinatius's house, among the portfolios of letters which had been brought to him;
and at Rome in the house of Lucius Tullius, an intimate friend of yours, and another manager of the company, in portfolios of letters which had been received by him. And from these letters observe, I pray you, the impudence of this man's usury.
[The letters of Lucius Vettius to Publius Servilius, and to Caius Antistius, managers of the company.
 Vettius says that he will be with you, and will take notice how you make up your accounts for the treasury; so that, if you do not restore to the people this money which has been put out at interest, you shall restore it to the company.
 Can we not establish what we assert by this witness, can we not establish it by the letters of Publius Servilius and Caius Antistius, managers of the company, men of the highest reputation and of the highest honour, and by the authority of the company whose letters we are using?
or must we seek for something on which we can rely more, for something more important? Vettius, your most intimate friend, Vettius, your connection, to whose sister you are married, Vettius, the brother of your wife, the brother of your quaestor, bears witness to your most infamous theft, to your most evident embezzlement; for by what other name is a lending of the public money at usury to be called?
Read what follows.
He says that your clerk, O Verres, was the drawer up of the bond for this usury: the managers threaten him also in their letters; in fact, it happened by chance that two managers were with Vettius.
They think it intolerable that twenty-four per cent should be taken from them, and they are right to think so.
For whoever did such a thing before? who ever attempted to do such a thing, who ever thought that such a thing could be done, as for a magistrate to venture to take money as interest from the farmers, though the senate had often assisted the farmers by remitting the interests due from them?
Certainly that man could have no hope of safety, if the farmers that is, the Roman knights, were the judges. He ought to have less hope now, O judges, now that you have to decide; and so much the less, in proportion as it is more honourable to be roused by the injuries of others than by one's own. What reply do you think of making to all this?
Will you deny that you did it?
Will you defend yourself on the ground that it was lawful for you to do it?
How can you deny it?
Can you deny it, to be convicted by the authority of such important letters, by so many farmers appearing as witnesses?
But how can you say it was lawful? In truth, if I were to prove that you, in your own province, had lent on usury your own money, and not the money of the Roman people, still you could not escape; but when I prove that you lent the public money, the money decreed to you to buy corn with, and that you received interest from the farmers, will you make any one believe that this was lawful?
a deed than which not only others have never, but you yourself have never done a more audacious or more infamous one.
I cannot, in truth, O judges, say that even that which appears to me to be perfectly unprecedented, and about which I am going to speak next I mean, the fact of his having actually paid very many cities nothing at all for their corn was either more audacious or more impudent; the booty derived from this act was perhaps greater, but the impudence of the other was certainly not less.
 And since I have said enough about this lending at interest, now, I pray you, give your attention to the question of the embezzlement of the whole sum in many instances.
There are many cities in Sicily, O judges, of great splendour and of high reputation, and among the very first of these is the city of Halesa. You will find no city more faithful to its duties, more rich in wealth, more influential in its authority.
After that man had ordered it to furnish every year sixty thousand modii of wheat, he took money for the wheat, at the price which wheat bore in Sicily at the time; all the money which he thus received from the public treasury, he kept for himself.
I was amazed, O judges, when a man of the greatest ability, of the highest wisdom, and of the greatest influence, Aeneas of Halesa, first stated this to me at Halesa in the senate of Halesa; a man to whom the senate by public resolution had given a charge to return me and my brother thanks, and at the same time to explain to us the matters which concerned this trial.
 He proves to me that this was his constant custom and system; that, when the entire quantity of corn had been brought to him under the name of tenths, then he was accustomed to exact money from the cities, to object to the corn delivered, and as for all the corn which he was forced to send to Rome, he sent that quantity from his own profits and from his own store of corn.
I demand the accounts, I inspect the documents, I see that the people of Halesa, from whom sixty thousand modii had bees levied, had given none, that they had paid money to Volcatus, and to Timarchides the clerk. I find a case of plunder of this kind, O judges, that the praetor, whose duty it was to buy corn, did not buy it, but sell it; and that he embezzles and appropriates the money which he ought to have divided among the cities.
It did not appear to me any longer to be a theft, but a monster and a prodigy; to reject the corn of the cities, and to approve of his own; when he had approved of his own, then to put a price on that corn, to take from the cities what he had fixed, and to retain what he had received from the Roman people.
How many degrees of offence in one single act of fraud do you think will be enough, if I insist on them severally, to bring the matter to a point where he can go no further?
You reject the Sicilian corn; why?
because you are sending some yourself.
Have you any Sicily of your own, which can supply you corn of another sort?
When the senate decrees that corn he bought in Sicily, or when the people order this, this, as I imagine, is what they mean, that Sicilian corn is to be brought from Sicily.
When you reject all the corn of Sicily, do you send corn to Rome from Egypt or from Syria?
You reject the corn of Halesa, of Cephalaedis, of Thermae, of Amestras, of Tyndaris, of Herbita, and of many other cities.
What has happened then to cause the lands of these people to bear corn of such a sort while you were praetor, as they never bore before, so that it can neither be approved of by you, nor by the Roman people; especially when the managers of the different companies had taken corn, being the tenths, from the same land, and of the same year, to Rome?
What has happened that the corn which made part of the tenths was approved, and that that which was bought, though out of the same barn, was not approved of?
Is there any doubt that all that rejection of corn was contrived with the object of raising money? Be it so.
You reject the corn of Halesa, you have corn from another tribe which you approve of.
Buy that which pleases you; dismiss those whose corn you have rejected.
But from those whom you reject you exact such sum of money as may be equivalent to the quantity of corn which you require of their city.
I see from the public documents that the people of Halesa gave you fifteen sesterces for every medimnus I will prove from the accounts of the wealthiest of the cultivators, that at the same time no one in Sicily sold corn at a higher price.
What, then, is the reason for your rejecting, or rather what madness is it to reject corn which comes from that place from which the senate and the people of Rome ordered it to be brought? which comes from that very heap, a part of which, under the name of tenths, you had actually approved of?
and besides, to exact money from the cities for the purchase of cow, when you had already received it from the treasury?
Did the Terentian law enjoin you to buy corn from the Sicilians with the money of the Sicilians, or to buy corn from the Sicilians with the money of the Roman people?
 But now you see that all that money out of the treasury, which ought to have been given to these cities for corn, has been made profit of by that man.
For you take fifteen sesterces for a medimus of wheat; for that is the value of a medimus at that time. You keep eighteen sesterces; for that is the price of Sicilian corn, estimated according to law.
What difference does it make whether you did this, or whether you did not reject the corn, but, after the corn was approved and accepted, detained all the public money, and paid none to any city whatever?
when the valuation of the law is such that while it is tolerable to the Sicilians at other times, it ought also to be pleasant to them during your praetorship.
For a modius is valued by law at three sesterces. But, while you were praetor, it was, as you boast in many letters to your friends, valued at two sesterces.
But suppose it was three sesterces, since you exacted that price from the cities for every modius. When, if you had paid the Sicilians as much as the Roman people had ordered you to pay, it might have been most pleasing to the cultivators, you not only did not choose them to receive what they ought, but you even compelled them to pay what was not due from them.
 And that these things were done in this manner, you may know, O judges, both from the public documents of the cities, and from their public testimonies; in all which you will find nothing false, nothing invented as suited to the times. Everything which we speak of is entered in the returns and made up in a regular manner, without any interpolations or irregularities being foisted into the people's accounts, but while they are all made up with deliberation and accuracy.
Read the accounts of the people of Halesa.
To whom does he say that money was paid?
Speak, speak, I say, a little louder.
To Volcatius, to Timarchides, to Maevius.
What is all this, O Verres?
have you not left yourself even this argument in your defence, that they are the managers of the companies who have been concerned in those matters? that they are the managers who have rejected the corn? that they are the managers who have settled the affair with the cities for money?
and that it is they also who have taken money from you in the name of those cities?
and, moreover, that they have bought corn for themselves; and that all these things do not at all concern you?
It would, in truth, be an insufficient and a wretched defence for a praetor to say this, "I never touched the corn, I never saw it, I gave the managers of the companies the power of approving of rejecting it; the managers extorted money from the cities but I paid to the managers the money which I ought to have paid to the people. "
This is, as I have said, an insufficient, or rather, a profligate defence against an accusation. But still, even this one, if you were to wish to use it, you cannot use.
Volcatius, the delight of yourself and your friends, forbids you to make mention of the manager; and Timarchides, the prop of your household, stops the mouth of your defence; who, as well as Volcatius, had money paid to him from the cities. But now your clerk, with that golden ring of his, which he procured out of these matters, will not allow you to avail yourself of that argument.
What then remains for you, except to confess that you sent to Rome corn which had been bought with the money of the Sicilians? that you appropriated the public money to your own purposes?
O you habit of sinning, what delight you afford to the wicked and the audacious, when chastisement is afar off, and when impunity attends you!
This is not the first time that that man has been guilty of that sort of peculation, but now for the first time is he convicted.
We have seen money paid to him from the treasury, while he was quaestor, for the expense of a consular army; we saw, a few months afterwards, both army and consul stripped of everything All that money lay hid in that obscurity and darkness which at that time had seized upon the whole republic.
After that, he discharged the duties of the quaestorship to which he succeeded under Dolabella.
He embezzled a vast sum of money; but he mixed up his accounts of that money with the confusion consequent on the conviction of Dolabella.
Immense sums of money were entrusted to him when praetor.
You will not find him a man to lick up these most infamous profits nervously and gently; he did not hesitate to swallow up at a gulp the whole of the public money.
That wicked covetousness, when it is implanted in a man's nature, creeps on in such a way, when the habit of sinning has emancipated itself from restraint, that it is not able to put any limits to its audacity.
At length it is detected, and it is detected in affairs of great importance, and of undoubted certainty.
And it seems to me that, by the interposition of the gods, this man too has become involved in such dishonesty, as not only to suffer punishment for the crimes which he has lately committed, but also to be overwhelmed with the vengeance due to the sins which he committed against Carbo and against Dolabella.
There is in truth also another new feature in this crime, O judges, which will remove all doubts as to his criminality on the former charge respecting the tenths.
For, to say nothing of this fact, that very many of the cultivators of the soil had not corn enough for the second tenths, and for those eight thousand modii which they were bound to sell to the Roman people, but that they bought them of your agent, that is, of Apronius;
which is a clear proof that you had left the cultivators actually nothing: to pass over this, which teas been clearly set forth in many men's evidence, can anything be more certain than this, that all the corn of Sicily, and all the crops of the land liable to the payment of tenths, were for three years in your power and in your barns?
for when you were demanding of the cities money for corn, whence was the corn to be procured for you to send to Rome, if you had it not all collected and locked up?
Therefore, in the affair of that corn, the first profit of all was that of the corn itself, which had been taken by violence from the cultivators;
the next profit was because that very corn which had been procured by you during your three years, you sold not once, but twice; not for one payment, but for two, though it was one and the same lot of corn; once to the cities, for fifteen sesterces a medimnus, a second time to the Roman people, from whom you got eighteen sesterces a medimus for the very same corn.
But perhaps you approved besides of the corn of the Centuripans, of the Agrigentines, and of some others, and paid money to these nations.
There may be some cities in that number whose corn you were unwilling to object to.
What then?
Was all the money that was owed for corn paid to these cities?
Find me one not one people, but one cultivator.
See, seek, look around, if perchance there is any single man in that province in which you were governor for three years, who does not wish you to be ruined. Produce me one, I say, out of all those cultivators who contributed money even to raise a statue to you, who will say that everything that was due for corn was paid.
I pledge myself, O judges, that none will say so.
 Out of all the money which it was your duty to pay to the cultivators, you were in the habit of making deductions on certain pretexts; first of all for the examination, and for the difference in the exchanges; secondly, for some stealing money or other.
All these names, O judges, do not belong to any legal demand, but to the most infamous robberies.
For what difference of exchange can there be when all use one kind of money?
And what is sealing money How has this name got introduced into the accounts of a magistrate? how came it to be connected with the public money?
For the third description of deduction was such as if it were not only lawful, but even proper; and not only proper, but absolutely necessary.
Two fiftieths were deducted from the entire sum in the name of the clerk.
Who gave you leave to do this? what law? what authority of the senate? Moreover where was the justice of your clerk taking such a sum, whether it was taken from the property of the cultivators, or from the revenues of the Roman people?
For if that sum can he deducted without injury to the cultivators of the soil, let the Roman people have it, especially in the existing difficulties of the treasury; but if the Roman people intended it to be paid to the cultivators, and if it is just that it should be, then shall your officer, hired at small wages paid by the people, plunder the property of the cultivators?
And shall Hortensius excite against me in this cause the whole body of clerks? and shall he say that their interests are undermined by me, and their lights opposed?
as if this were allowed to the clerks by any precedent or by any right.
Why should I go back to old times? or why should I make mention of those clerks, who, it is evident, were most upright and conscientious men?
It does not escape my observation, O judges, that old examples are now listened to and considered as imaginary fables I will go only to the present wretched and profligate time.
You, O Hortensius, have lately been quaestor.
You can say what your clerks did; I say this of mine; when, in that same Sicily, I was paying the cities money for their corn, and had with me two most economical men as clerks, Lucius Manilius and Lucius Sergius, then I say that not only these two fiftieths were not deducted, but that not one single coin was deducted from any one.
I would say that all the credit of this was to be attributed to me, O judges, if they had ever asked this of me, if they had ever thought of it.
For why should a clerk make this deduction, and not rather the muleteer who brought the corn down?
or the courier, by whose arrival they heard of its coming and made the demand?
or the crier, who ordered them to appear?
or the lictor and the slave of Venus, who carried the money?
What part of the business or what seasonable assistance can a scrivener pretend to, that, I will not say such high wages should be given him, but, that a division of such a large sum should take place with him?
Oh they are a very honourable body of men; who denies it?
or what has that to do with this business?
But they are an honourable body, because to their integrity are entrusted the public accounts and the safety of the magistrates.
Ask, therefore, of those scriveners who are worthy of their body, masters of households, virtuous and honourable men, what is the meaning of those fiftieths?
In a moment you will all clearly see that the whole affair is unprecedented and scandalous.
Bring me back to those scriveners, if you please; do not get together those men who when with a little money scraped together from the presents of spendthrifts and the gratuities to actors, they have bought themselves a place in some decury, think that they have mounted from the first class of hissed buffoons into the second class of the citizens.
Those scriveners I will have as arbitrators in this business between you and me, men who are indignant that those other fellows should be scriveners at ale
Although, when we see that there are many unfit men in that order, an order which is held out as a reward for industry and good conduct, are we to wonder that there are some base men in that order also, a place in which any one can purchase for money?
When you confess that your clerk, with your leave, took thirteen hundred thousand sesterces of the public money, do you think that you have any defence left?
that any one can endure this? Do you think that even any one of those who are at this moment your own advocates can listen to this with equanimity?
Do you think that, in the same city in which an action was brought against Caius Cato, a most illustrious man, a man of consular rank, to recover a sum of eighteen thousand sesterces; in that same city it could be permitted to your clerk to carry off at one swoop thirteen hundred thousand sesterces?
Here is where that golden ring came from, with which you presented him in the public assembly; a gift which was an act of such extraordinary impudence that it seemed novel to all the Sicilians, and to me incredible.
For our generals, after a defeat of the enemy, after some splendid success, have often presented their secretaries with golden rings in a public assembly; but you, for what exploit, for the defeat of what enemy did you dare to summon an assembly for the purpose of making this present?
Nor did you only present your clerk with a ring, but you also presented a man of great bravery, a man very unlike yourself, Quintus Rubrius, a man of eminent virtue, and dignity, and riches, with a crown, with horse trappings, and a chain; and also Marcus Cossutius, a most conscientious and honourable man, and Marcus Castritius, a man of the greatest wealth, and ability, and influence.
What was the meaning of these presents made to these three Roman citizens?
Besides that, you gave presents also to some of the most powerful and noble of the Sicilians, who have not, as you hoped, been the more slow to come forward, but have only come with more dignity to give their evidence in this trial of yours.
from the spoils of what enemy? gained in what victory?
Of what booty or trophies do they make a part?
Is it because while you were praetor, a most beautiful fleet, the bulwark of Sicily, the defence of the province, was burnt by the hands of pirates arriving in a few light galleys?
or because the territory of Syracuse was laid waste by the conflagrations of the banditti while you were praetor?
or because the forum of the Syracuse overflowed with the blood of the captains?
or because a piratical galley sailed about in the harbour of Syracuse?
I can find no reason which I can imagine for your having fallen into such madness, unless indeed your object was to prevent men from ever forgetting the disasters of your administration.
A clerk was presented with a golden ring, and an assembly was convoked to witness that presentation.
What must have been your face when you saw in the assembly those men out of whose property that golden ring was provided for the present; who themselves had laid aside their golden rings, and had taken them off from their children, in order that your clerk might have the means to support your liberality and kindness?
Moreover, what was the preface to this present?
Was it the old one used by the generals?
"Since in battle, in war, in military affairs, you.
 There never was even any mention of such matters while you were praetor.
Was it this, Since you have never failed me in any act of covetousness, or in any baseness, and since you have been concerned with me in all my wicked actions, both during my lieutenancy, and my praetorship, and here in Sicily; on account of all these things, since I have already made you rich, I now present you with this golden ring?"
This would have been the truth.
For that golden ring given by you does not prove he was a brave man, but only a rich one.
As we should judge that same ring, if given by some one else, to have evidence of virtue when given by you, we consider it only an accompaniment to money.
 I have spoken, O judges, of the corn collected as tenths; I have spoken of that which was purchased; the last, the only remaining topic, is the valuation of the corn, which ought to have weight with every one, both from the vastness of the sum involved, and from the description of the injustice done; and more than either, because against this charge he is provided, not with some ingenious defence, but with a most scandalous confession of it.
For though it was lawful for him, both by a decree of the senate, and also by the laws, to take corn and lay it up in the granaries, and though the senate had valued that corn at four sesterces for a modius of wheat, two for one of barley, Verres, having first added to the quantity of wheat, valued each modius of wheat with the cultivators at three denarii.
My charge is not this, O Hortensius; do not you think about this; I know that many virtuous, and brave, and incorruptible men, have often valued, both with the cultivators of the soil and with cities, the corn which ought to have been taken and laid up in the granary, and have taken money instead of corn;
I know what is accustomed to be done; I know what is lawful to be done; nothing which has been previously the custom of virtuous men is found fault with ill the conduct of Verres.
This is what I find fault with, that, when a modius of wheat in Sicily cost two sesterces, as his letter which was sent to you declares, or at most, three, as has also already been made clear from all the evidence and all the accounts of the cultivators, he exacted from the cultivators three denarii for every modius of wheat.
This is the charge; I wish you to understand, that my accusation turns not on the fact of his having valued the corn, nor even of his having valued it at three denarii but on that of his having increased the quantity of corn, and consequently the amount of the valuation.
In truth this valuation originated, O judges, at first not in the convenience of the praetors or consuls, but in the advantage to the cultivators and the cities.
For originally, no one was so impudent as to demand money when it was corn that was due;
certainly this proceeded in the first instance from the cultivator or from the city which was required to furnish corn; when they had either sold the corn, or wished to keep it, or were not willing to carry it to that place where it was required to be delivered, they begged as a kindness and a favour, that they might be allowed, instead of the corn, to give the value of the corn.
From such a commencement as this, and from the liberality and accommodating spirit of the magistrates the custom of valuations was introduced.
More covetous, magistrates succeeded; who, in their avarice, devised not only a plan for their own gain, but also a way of escape, and a plea for their defence.
They adopted a custom of always requiring corn to be delivered at the most remote and inconvenient places, in order that, through the difficulty of carriage, the cultivators might be more easily brought to the valuation which they wished.
In a case of this kind it is easier to form one's opinion, than to make out a case for blame; because we can think the man who does this avaricious, but we cannot easily make out a charge against him;
because it appears that we must grant this to our magistrates, that they may have power to receive the corn in any place they choose; therefore this is what many perhaps have done, not, however, so many out that those whom we recollect, or whom we have heard of as the most upright magistrates, have declined to do it.
I ask of you now, O Hortensius, with which of these classes you are going to compare the conduct of Verres?
With those, I suppose, who, influenced by their own kindness, have granted, as a favour and as a convenience to the cities, permission to give money instead of corn.
And so I suppose the cultivators begged of him, that, as they could not sell a modius of wheat for three sesterces, they may be allowed to pay three denarii instead of each modius.
Or, since you do not dare to say this, will you take refuge in that assertion, that, being influenced by the difficulty of carriage, they preferred to give three denarii?
Of what carriage?
Wishing not to have to carry it from what place to what place?
from Philomelium to Ephesus?
I see what is the difference between the price of corn at different places; I see too how many days' journey it is; I see that it is for the advantage of the Philomelians rather to pay in Phrygia the price which corn bears in Ephesus, than to carry it to Ephesus, or to send both money and agents to Ephesus to buy corn.
But what can there be like that in Sicily?
Enna is a completely inland town.
Compel (that is the utmost stretch of your authority) the people of Enna to deliver their corn at the waterside; they will take it to Phintia, or to Halesa, or to Catina, places all very distant from one another, the same day that you issue the order;
though there is not even need of any carriage at all;
for all this profit of the valuation, O judges, arises from the variety in the price of corn.
For a magistrate in a province can manage this, namely, to receive it where it is dearest.
And therefore that is the way valuations are managed in Asia and in Spain, and in those provinces in which corn is not everywhere the same price.
But in Sicily what difference did it make to any one in what place he delivered it?
for he had not to carry it; and wherever he was ordered to carry it, there he might buy the same quantity of corn which he sold at home.
Wherefore, if, O Hortensius, you wish to show that anything, in the matter of the valuation, was done by him like what has been done by others, you must show that at any place in Sicily, while Verres was praetor, a modius of wheat ever cost three denarii.
See what a defence I have opened to you; how unjust to our allies, how far removed from the good of the republic, how utterly foreign to the intention and meaning of the law.
Do you, when I am prepared to deliver you corn on my own farm, in my own city, in the very place, in short, in which you are, in which you live, in which you manage all your business and conduct the affairs of the province, do you, I say, select for me some remote and desert corner of the island?
Do you bid me deliver it there, whither it is very inconvenient to carry it? where I cannot purchase it?
It is a shameful action, O judges, intolerable, permitted to no one by law, but perhaps not yet punished in any instance.
Still this very thing, which I say ought not to be endured, I grant to you, O Verres; I make you a present of it.
If in any place of that province corn was at the price at which he valued it, then I think that this charge ought not to have any weight against him.
But when it was fetching two sesterces, or even three at the outside, in any district of the province which you choose to name, you exacted twelve.
If there cannot be any dispute between you and me either about the price of corn, or about your valuation, why are you sitting there? What are you waiting for? What will you say in your defence?
Does money appear to have been appropriated by you contrary to the laws, contrary to the interests of the republic, to the great injury of our allies? Or will you say in your defence, that all this has been done lawfully, regularly, in a manner advantageous to the republic, without injury to any one?
When the senate had given you money out of the treasury, and had paid you money which you were to pay the cultivators, a denarius for every modius, what was it your duty to do?
If you had wished to do what Lucius Piso, surnamed Thrifty, who first made the law about extortion, would have done, when you had bought the corn at the regular price, you would have returned whatever money there was over.
If you wished to act as men desirous of gaining popularity, or as kind-hearted men would, as the senate had valued the corn at more than the regular price, you would have paid for it according to the valuation of the senate, and not according to the market price.
Or if, as many do, a conduct which produces some profit indeed, but still an honest and allowable one, you would not have bought corn, since it was cheaper than they expected, but you would have retained the money which the senate had granted you for furnishing the granary.
But what is it that you have done?
What presence has it, I will not say of justice, but even of any ordinary roguery or impudence?
For, indeed, there is not usually anything which men, however dishonest, dare to do openly in their magistracy, for which they cannot give, if not a good excuse, still some excuse or other.
But what sort of conduct is this?
The praetor came. Says he, I must buy some corn of you.
Very well.
At a denarius for a modius I am much obliged to you; you are very liberal, for I cannot get three sesterces for it.
But I don't want the corn, I will take the money.
I had hoped, says the cultivator, that I should have touched the denarii; but if you must have money, consider what is the price of corn now.
I see it costs two sesterces.
What money, then, can be required of me for you, when the senate has allowed you four sesterces?
Listen, now, to what he demands And I entreat you, O judges, remark at the same time the equity of the praetor: "The four sesterces which the senate has voted me, and has paid me out of the treasury, those I shall keep, and shall transfer out of the public chest into my strong box. "
What comes next?
What?
For each modius which I require of you, do you give me eight sesterces.
On what account?
"What do you ask me on what account for?	"
It is not so much on what account that we need think, as of how advantageous it will be, how great a booty I shall get. "
Speak, speak, says the cultivator, a little plainer.
The senate desires that you should pay me money, that I should deliver corn to you.
Will you retain that money which the senate intended should be paid to me, and take two sesterces a-modius from me, to whom you ought to pay a denarius for each modius?
And then will you call this plunder and robbery granary-money?
This one injury, this single distress, was wanting to the cultivators under your praetorship, to complete the ruin of the remainder of their fortunes.
For what remaining injury could be done to the man who, owing to this injury, was forced not only to dose all his corn, but even to sell all his tools and stock?
He had no way to turn.
From what produce could he find the money to pay you?
Under the name of tenths, as much had been taken from him as the caprice of Apronius chose; for the second tenths and for the corn that had been purchased either nothing had been paid, or only so much as the clerk had left behind, or perhaps it was even taken for nothing, as you have had proved to you. Is money also to be extorted from the cultivators? How?
By what right? by what precedent?
For when the crops of the cultivator were carried off and plundered with every kind of injustice, the cultivator appeared to lose what he had himself raised with his plough, for which he had toiled, what his land and his cornfields had produced.
But amid this terrible ill-treatment, there was still this wretched consolation, that he seemed only to be losing what, under another praetor, he could get again out of the same land.
But now it is necessary for the cultivator to give money, which he does not get out of the land to sell his oxen, and his plough itself, and all his tools
For you are not to think this.
"The man has also possessions in ready money; he has also possessions inland, near the city.	-"
" For when a burden is imposed on a cultivator of the soil, it is not the mean and ability of the man that is to be considered, whether he has any property besides; but the quality and description of his land, what that can endure, what that can suffer, what that can and ought to produce.	"
Although those men have been drained and ruined by Verres in every possible manner, still you ought to decide what contribution you consider the cultivator ought to render to the republic on account of his land, and what charges he can support.
You impose the payment of tenths on them. They endure that.
A second tenth.
You think they must be subservient to your necessities, that they must, besides that, supply you with more if you choose to purchase it
They will so supply you if you choose.
How severe all this is, and how little, after all these deductions are made, can be left of clear profit for the owners, I think you, from your own farming experience, can guess.
Add, now, to all this, the edicts, the regulations, the injuries of Verres, add the reign and the rapine of Apronius, and the slaves of Apronius, in the land subject to the payment of tenths.
Although I pass over all this; I am speaking of the granary.
Is it your intention that the Sicilians should give corn to our magistrates for their granaries for nothing?
What can be more scandalous, what can be more iniquitous than that?
And yet, know you that this would have seemed to the cultivators a thing to be wished for, to be begged for, while that man was praetor.
Sositenus is a citizen of Entella; a man of the greatest prudence, and of the noblest birth in his city.
You have heard what he said when he was sent by the public authority to this trial as a deputy, together with Artemon and Meniscus, men of the highest character.
He, when in the senate at Entella he was discussing with me the injustice of Verres, said this: that, if the question of the granaries and of the valuation were conceded, the Sicilians were willing to promise the senate corn for the granary without payment, so that we need not for the future vote such large sums to our magistrates.
I am sure that you clearly perceive how advantageous this would be for the Sicilians not because of the justice of such a condition, but in the way of choosing the least of two evils; for the man who had given Verres a thousand modii for the granary as his share of the contribution required, would have given two, or, at most, three thousand sesterces, but the same man has now been compelled for the same quantity of corn to give eight thousand sesterces.
A cultivator could not stand this for three years, at least not out of his own produce.
He must inevitably have sold his stock.
But if the land can endure this contribution and this tribute, that is to say, if Sicily can bear and support it, let it pay it to the Roman people rather than to our magistrates.
It is a great sum, a great and splendid revenue. If you can obtain it without damage to the province, without injury to our allies, I do not object at all.
Let as much be given to the magistrates for their granary as has always been given. What Verres demands besides, that, if they cannot provide it, let them refuse. If they can provide it, let it be the revenue of the Roman people rather than the plunder of the praetor.
In the next place, why is that valuation established for only one description of corn?
If it is just and endurable, then Sicily owes the Roman people tenths; let it give three denarii for each single modius of wheat; let it keep the corn itself.
Money has been paid to you, O Verres, one sum with which you were to buy corn for the granary, the other with which you were to buy corn from the cities to send to Rome.
You keep at your own house the money which has been given to you; and besides that, you receive a vast sum in your own name. Do the same with respect to that corn which belongs to the Roman people; exact money from the cities according to the same valuation, and give back what you have received, then the treasury of the Roman people will be better filled than it ever has been.
But Sicily could not endure that in the case of the public corn; she did indeed bear it in the case of my own.
Just as if that valuation was more just when your advantage was concerned, than when that of the Roman people was; or, as if the conduct which I speak of and that which you adopted, differed only in the description of the injury, and not in the magnitude of the sum involved.
But that granary they can by no means bear, not even if everything else be remitted; not even if they were for ever hereafter delivered from all the injuries and distresses which they have suffered while you were praetor, still they say that they could not by any possibility support that granary and that valuation.
 Sophocles of Agrigentum, a most eloquent man, adorned with every sort of learning and with every virtue, is said to have spoken lately before Cnaeus Pompeius, when he was consul, on behalf of all Sicily, concerning the miseries of the cultivators, with great earnestness and great variety of arguments, and to have lamented their condition to him. And of all the things which he mentioned, this appeared the most scandalous to those who were present, (for the matter was discussed in the presence of a numerous assembly,) that, in the very matter in which the senate had dealt most honestly and most kindly with the cultivators, in that the praetor should plunder, and the cultivators be ruined and that should not only be done, but done in such a manner as if it were lawful and permitted.
What says Hortensius to this?
that the charge is false?
He will never say this.
That no great sum was gained by this method?
He will not even say that.
That no injury was done to Sicilians and the cultivators?
How can he say that? What then, will he say,
That it was done by other men.
What is the meaning of this?
Is it a defence against the charge, or company in banishment that he is seeking for?
Will you in this republic, in this time of unchecked caprice, and (as up to this time the course of judicial proceedings has proved) licentiousness on the part of men, will you defend that which is found fault with, and affirm that it has been done properly; not by reference to right, nor to equity, nor to law, nor because it was expedient, nor because it was allowed, but because it was some one else who did it?
Other men, too, hare done other things, and plenty of them; why in this charge alone do you use this sort of defence?
There are some things in you so extraordinary, that they cannot be said of, or meet in the character of, any other man; there are some things which you have in common with many men.
Therefore, to say nothing of your acts of peculation, or of your taking money for the appointment of judges, and other things of that sort which, perhaps, other men also may have committed; will you defend yourself, also, from the charge which I bring against you as the most serious one of all the charge, namely, of having taken money to influence your legal decisions, by the same argument, that others have done so too?
Even if I were to admit the assertion, still I should not admit it as any defence.
For it would be better that by your condemnation there should be more limited room for defending dishonesty left to others, than that, owing to your acquittal, others should be thought to have legitimately done what they have done with the greatest audacity.
 All the provinces are mourning; all the nations that are free are complaining;
every kingdom is expostulating with us about our covetousness and our injustice; there is now no place on this side of the ocean, none so distant, none so out of the way, that, in these latter times, the lust and iniquity of our citizens has not reached it. The Roman people is now no longer able to bear (I have not to say the violence, the arms, and the war, but) the mourning, the tears, and the complaints, of all foreign nations.
In a case of this sort, in speaking of customs of this sort, if he who is brought before the tribunal, when he is detected in evident crimes, says that others have also done the same, he will not want examples; but the republic will want safety, if, by the precedents of wicked men, wicked men are to be delivered from trial and from danger.
Do you approve of the manners of men at present?
Do you approve of men's behaving themselves in magistracies as they do?
Do you approve, finally, of our allies being treated as you see that they have been treated all this time?
Why am I forced to take all this trouble?
Why are you all sitting here?
Why do you not rise up and depart before I have got halfway through my speech?
Do you wish to lay open at all the audacity and licentiousness of these men?
Give up doubting whether it is more useful, because there are so many wicked men, to spare one, or by the punishment of one wicked man, to check the wickedness of many.
Although, what are those numerous instances of wicked men?
For when in a cause of such importance, when in the case of a charge of such gravity, the defendant has begun to say that anything has frequently been done, those who hear him are expecting precedents drawn from ancient tradition; from old records and old documents, full of dignity, full of antiquity.
For such instances usually have both a great deal of authority in proving any point, and are very pleasant to hear cited.
Will you speak to me of the Africani, and the Catos and the Laelii, and will you say that they have done the same thing?
Then, even though the act might not please me, still I should not be able to fight against the authority of those men.
But, since you will not be able to produce them, will you bring forward these moderns, Quintus Catulus the father, Caius Marcius, Quintus Scaevola, Marcus Scaurus, Quintus Metellus?
who have all governed provinces, and who have all levied corn on the ground of filling the granary.
The authority of the men is great, so great as to be able to remove all suspicion of wrong-doing.
But you have not, even out of these men who have lived more recently, one precedent of that authority.
Whither, then, or to what examples will you bring me back?
Will you lead me away from those men who have spent their lives in the service of the republic at a time when manners were very strict, and when the opinion of men was considered of great weight, and when the courts of justice were severe, to the existing caprice and licentiousness of men of the present age?
And do you seek precedents for your defence among those men, as a warning to whom the Roman people have decided that they are in need of some severe examples?
I do not, indeed, altogether condemn the manners of the present time, as long as we follow those examples which the Roman people approves of; not those which it condemns.
I will not look around me, I will not go out of doors to seek for any one, while we have as judges those chiefs of the city, Publius Servilius and Quintus Catulus, who are men of such authority, and distinguished for such exploits, that they may be classed in that number of ancient and most illustrious men of whom I have previously spoken.
We are seeking examples, and those not ancient ones.
Very lately each of them had an army.
Ask, O Hortensius, since you are fond of modern instances, what they did.
Will you not?
Quintus Catulus used corn, but he exacted no money.
Publius Servilius, though he commanded an army for five years, and by that means might have made an incalculable sum of money, thought that nothing was lawful for himself which he had not seen his father and his grandfather, Quintus Metellus, do.
Shall Caius Verres be found, who will say that everything is lawful for him which is profitable?
Will he allege in his defence that he has done in accordance with the example set by others, what none, except wicked men, ever have done?
Oh, but it has been often done in Sicily.
What is that condition in which Sicily is?
Why is the law of injustice, especially defined by a reference to the usages prevalent in that land which, on account of its antiquity as our ally, its fidelity, and its nearness to us, ought to enjoy the best laws of all?
However, in Sicily itself, (I will not go abroad to look for examples,) I will take examples out of the very bench of judges before me.
Caius Marcellus, I call you as a witness.
You governed the province of Sicily when you were proconsul.
Under your command were any sums of money extorted, under the name of money for the granary?
I do not give you any credit for this.
There are other exploits, other designs of yours worthy of the highest praise, measures by which you recovered and set up again an afflicted and ruined province.
For even Lepidus whom you succeeded had not committed this fraud about the granary.
What precedents then have you in Sicily affecting this charge about the granary, if you cannot defend yourself from the accusation by quoting any action even of Lepidus, much less any action of Marcellus?
Are you going to bring me back to the valuation of the corn, and the exaction of money by Marcus Antonius?
Just so, says he; to the valuation of Marcus Antonius.
For this is what he seemed to mean by his signs and nods.
Out of all the praetors of the Roman people then, and consuls, and generals, have you selected Marcus Antonius, and even the most infamous action done by him, for your imitation?
And here is it difficult for me to say, or for the judges to think, that in that unlimited authority Marcus Antonius behaved himself in such a manner, that it is by far more injurious to Verres to say that as he, in a most infamous transaction, wished to imitate Antonius, than if he were able to allege in his defence, that he had never in his whole life done anything like Marcus Antonius?
Men in trials are accustomed to allege, in making a defence against an accusation, not what any one did, but what he did that was good.
In the middle of his course of injustice and covetousness death overtook Antony, while he was still both doing and planning many things contrary to the safety of the allies many things contrary to the advantage of our provinces.
Will you defend the audacity of Verres by the example of Antonius, as if the senate and people of Rome approved of all his actions and designs?
 But Sacerdos did the same.
You name an upright man, and one endued with the greatest wisdom; but he can only be thought to have done the same thing, if he did it with the same intention.
For the mere fact of the valuation has never been found fault with by me; but the equity of it depends on the advantage to, and willingness of the cultivator.
No valuation can be found fault with, which is not only not disadvantageous, but which is even pleasing to the cultivator.
Sacerdos, when he came into the province, commanded corn to be provided for the granary.
As before the new harvest came in a modius of wheat was five denarii, the cities begged of him to have a valuation.
The valuation wee somewhat lower than the actual market price, for he valued it at three denarii.
You see that the same fact of a valuation, through the dissimilarity of the occasion, was a cause of praise in his instance, of accusation in yours.
In his instance it was a kindness, in yours an injury.
The same year Antonius valued corn at three denarii, after the harvest, in a season of exceeding cheapness, when the cultivators would rather give the corn for nothing, and he said that he had valued it at the same price as Sacerdos; and he spoke truly, but yet' by the same valuation the one had relieved the cultivators, the other had ruined them.
And if it were not the case that the whole value of corn must be estimated by the season, and the market price, not by the abundance, nor by the total amount, these modii and a half of yours, O Hortensius, would never have been so agreeable; in distributing which to the Roman people, for every head, small as the quantity was, you did an action which was most agreeable to all men; for the dearness of corn caused that, which seemed a small thing in reality, to appear at that time a great one.
If you had given such a largess to the Roman people in a time of cheapness, your kindness would have been derided and despised.
 Do not, therefore, say that Verres did the same as Sacerdos had done, since he did not do it on the same occasion, nor when wheat was at a similar price; say rather, since you have a competent authority to quote, that he did for three years what Antonius did on his arrival, and with reference to scarcely a month's provisions, and defend his innocence by the act and authority of Marcus Antonius.
For what will you say of Sextus Peducaeus, a most brave and honest man?
What cultivator ever complained of him?
or who did not think that his praetorship was the most impartial and the most active one that has ever been known up to this time?
He governed the province for two years,
when one year wee a year of cheapness, the other a year of the greatest dearness.
Did any cultivator either give him money in the cheap season, or in the dear season complain of the valuation of his corn?
Oh, but provisions were very abundant that dear season.
I believe they were; that is not a new thing nor a blamable one.
We very lately saw Caius Sentius, a man of old-fashioned and extraordinary incorruptibility, on account of the dearness of food which existed in Macedonia, make a great deal of money by furnishing provisions.
So that I do not grudge you your profits, if any have come to you legally; I complain of your injustice; I impeach your dishonesty; I cat your avarice into court, and arraign it before this tribunal.
But if you wish to excite a suspicion that this charge belongs to more men and more provinces than one, I will not be afraid of that defence of yours, but I will profess myself the defender of all the provinces.
In truth I say this, and I say it with a loud voice, "Wherever this has been done, it has been done wickedly; whoever has done it is deserving of punishment. "
For, in the name of the immortal gods, see, O judges, look forward with your mind's eye at what will be the result.
Many men have exacted large sums from unwilling cities, and from unwilling cultivators, in this way, under pretence of filling the granary. (I have no idea of any one person having done so except him, but I grant you this, and I admit that many have.
) In the case of this man you see the matter brought before a court of justice;
what can you do?
can you, when you are judges in a case of embezzlement which is brought before you, overlook the misappropriation of so large a sum?
or can you, though the law was made for the sake of the allies, turn a deaf ear to the complaints of the allies?
However, I give up this point too to you.
Disregard what is past, if you please; but do not destroy their hopes for the future, and ruin all the provinces; guard against this, against opening, by your authority, a visible and broad way for avarice, which up to this time has been in the habit of advancing by secret and narrow paths;
for if you approve of this, and if you decide that it is lawful for money to be taken on that pretext, at all events there is no one except the most foolish of men who will not for the future do what as yet no one except the most dishonest of men ever has done; they are dishonest men who exact money contrary to the laws, they are fools who omit to do what it has been decided that they may do.
In the next place, see, O judges, what a boundless licence for plundering people of money you will he giving to men.
If the man who exacts three denarii is acquitted, some one else will exact four, five, presently ten, or even twenty.
What reproof will he meet with?
At what degree of injury will the severity of the judge first begin to make a stand?
How many denarii will it be that will be quite intolerable? and at what point will the iniquity and dishonesty of the valuation be first arraigned?
For it is not the amount, but the description of valuation that will be approved of by you.
Nor can you decide in this manner, that it is lawful for a valuation to be made when the price fixed is three denarii, but not lawful when the price fixed is ten; for when a departure is once made from the standard of the market price, and when the affair is once so changed that it is not the advantage of the cultivators which is the rule, but the will of the praetor, then the manner of valuing no longer depends on law and duty, but on the caprice and avarice of men.
Wherefore, if in giving your decisions you once pass over the boundary of equity and law, know that you impose on those who come after no limit to dishonesty and avarice in valuing.
See, therefore, how many things are required of you at once.
Acquit the man who confesses that he has taken immense sums, doing at the same time the greatest injury to our allies.
That is not enough. There are also many others who have done the same thing.
Acquit them also, if there are any; so as to release as many rogues as possible by one decision.
Even that is not enough. Cause that it may be lawful to those who come after them to do the same thing.
It shall be lawful. Even this is too little.
Allow it to be lawful for every one to value corn at whatever price he pleases.
He may so value it.
You see now, in truth, O judges, that if this valuation be approved of by you, there will be no limit hereafter to any man's avarice, nor any punishment for dishonesty.
What, therefore, O Hortensius, are you about?
You are the consul elect, you have had a province allotted to you.
When you speak on the subject of the valuation of corn, we shall listen to you as if you were avowing that you will do what you defend as having been legitimately done by Verres; and as if you were very eager that that should be lawful for you which you say was lawful for him.
But if that is to be lawful, there is nothing which you can imagine any one likely to do hereafter, in consequence of which he can possibly be condemned for extortion.
For whatever sum of money any one covets, that amount it will be lawful for him to acquire, under the plea of the granary, and by means of the highness of the valuation.
 But there is a thing, which, even if Hortensius does not say it openly in defending Verres, he still does say in such a manner that you may suspect and think that this matter concerns the advantage of the senators; that it concerns the advantage of those who are judges, and who think that they will some day or other be in the provinces themselves as governors or as lieutenants.
But you must think that we have splendid judges, if you think them likely to show indulgence to the faults of others, in order the more easily to be allowed to commit faults themselves.
Do we then wish the Roman people, do we wish the provinces, and our allies, and foreign nations to think that, if senators are the judges, this particular manner of extorting immense sums of money with the greatest injustice will never be in any way chastised?
But if that be the case, what can we say against that praetor who every day occupies the senate, who insists upon it that the republic can not prosper, if the office of judge is not restored to the equestrian order?
But if he begins to agitate this one point, that there is one description of extortion, common to all the senators, and now almost legalized in the case of that order, by which immense sums are taken from the allies with the greatest injustice; and that this cannot possibly be repressed by tribunals of senators, but that, while the equestrian order furnished the senators, it never was committed; who, then, can resist him?
Who will be so desirous of gratifying you, who will be such a partisan of your order, as to be able to oppose the transference of the appointment of judges to that body?
And I wish he were able to make a defence to this charge by any argument, however false, as long as it is natural and customary.
You could then decide with less danger to yourselves, with less danger to all the provinces.
Did he deny that he had adopted this valuation?
You would appear to have believed the man in that statement, not to have approved of his action.
He cannot possibly deny it.
It is proved by all Sicily.
Out of all that numerous band of cultivators, there is not one from whom money has not been exacted on the plea of the granary.
I wish he were able to say even this, that that affair does not concern him; that the whole business relating to corn was managed by the quaestors.
Even that he cannot say, because his own letters are read which were sent to the cities, written on the subject of the three denarii.
What then is his defence?
"I have done what you accuse me of; I have extorted immense sums on the plea of the granary; but it was lawful for me to do so, and it will be lawful for you if you take care.	"
" A dangerous thing for the provinces for any classes of injury to be established by judicial decision to a dangerous thing for our order, for the Roman people to think that these men, who themselves are subject to the laws, cannot defend the laws with strictness when they are judges.	"
And while that man was praetor, O judges, there was not only no limit to his valuing corn, but there was none either to his demands of corn. Nor did he command that only to be supplied that was due, but as much as was advantageous for himself.
I will put before you the sum total of all the corn commanded to be furnished for the granary, as collected out of the public documents, and the testimonies of the cities You will find, O judges, that man commanded the cities to supply five times as much as it was lawful for him to take for the granary.
What can be added to this impudence, if he both valued it at such a price that men could not endure it, and also commanded so much more to be supplied than was permitted to him by the laws to require?
 Wherefore, now that you have heard the whole business of the corn, O judges, you can easily see that Sicily, that most productive and most desirable province, has been lost to the Roman people, unless you recover it by your condemnation of that man.
For what is Sicily, if you take away the cultivation of its land, and if you extinguish the multitude and the very name of the cultivators of the soil?
For what can there be left of disaster which has not come to those unhappy cultivators, with every circumstance of injury and insult?
They were liable, indeed, to pay tenths, but they have scarcely had a tenth left for themselves.
When money has been due to them, it has not been paid; though the senate intended them to supply corn for the granary according to a very equitable valuation, they have been compelled to sell even the tools with which they cultivate their lands.
 I have already said, O judges, that even if you remove all these injuries, still that the occupation of cultivating land is maintained owing to the hopes and a certain sort of pleasure which it gives, rather than because of the profit and emolument arising from it.
In truth every year constant labour and constant expense is incurred in the hope of a result which is casual and uncertain.
Moreover, the crop does not command a high price, except in a disastrous harvest.
But if there has been a great abundance of crops gathered, then there is cheapness in selling them.
So that you may see that the corn must be badly sold if it is got in well, or else that the crop must be bad if you get a good price for it.
And the whole business of agriculture is such, that it is regulated not by reason or by industry, but by those most uncertain things, the weather and the winds.
When from agriculture one tenth is extracted by law and on fair terms, when a second is levied by a new regulation, on account of the necessity of procuring a sufficient supply for ourselves, when, besides, corn is purchased every year by public authority, and when, after all that, more still is ordered by magistrates and lieutenants to be supplied for the granary, what, or how much is there after all this of his own crop which the cultivator or owner can have at his own disposal, for his own profit?
And if all this is endured, if by their care, and expense, and labour, they consult your advantage and that of the Roman people rather than themselves and their own profit, still, ought they also to bear these new edicts and commands of the praetors, and the imperiousness of Apronius, and the robberies and rapine of the slaves of Venus?
Ought they also to supply corn which ought to be purchased of them without getting any payment for it?
Ought they also, though they are willing to supply corn for the granary without payment, to be forced to pay large sums too?
Ought they also to endure all these injures and all these losses accompanied with the greatest insult and contumely?
Therefore, O judges, those things which they have not at all been able to bear, they have not borne.
You know that over the whole of Sicily the allotments of land are deserted and abandoned by their owners.
Nor is there anything else to be gained by this trial, except that our most ancient and faithful allies, the Sicilians, Roman settlers, and the cultivators of the soil, owing to your strictness and your care, may return to their farms and to their homes under my guidance and through my instrumentality.
THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE SECOND PLEADING IN THE PROSECUTION OF VERRES.
ABOUT THE STATUES
I come now to what Verres himself calls his passion what his friends call his disease, his madness; what the Sicilians call his rapine; what I am to call it, I know not.
I will state the whole affair to you, and do you consider it according to its own importance and not by the importance of its name.
First of all, O judges, suffer me to make you acquainted with the description of this conduct of his; and then, perhaps, you will not be very much puzzled to know by what name to call it.
I say that in all Sicily, in all that wealthy and ancient province, that in that number of towns and families of such exceeding riches, there was no silver vessel, no Corinthian or Delian plate, no jewel or pearl, nothing made of gold or ivory, no statue of marble or brass or ivory, no picture whether painted or embroidered, that he did not seek out, that he did not inspect, that, if he liked it, he did not take away.
I seem to be making a very extensive charge; listen now to the manner in which I make it.
For I am not embracing everything in one charge for the sake of making an impression, or of exaggerating his guilt.
When I say that he left nothing whatever of the sort in the whole province, know that I am speaking according to the strict meaning of the words, and not in the spirit of an accuser.
I will speak even more plainly; I will say that he has left nothing in any one's house, nothing even in the towns, nothing in public places, not even in the temples, nothing in the possession of any Sicilian, nothing in the possession of any Roman citizen; that he has left nothing, in short, which either came before his eyes or was suggested to his mind, whether private property or public, or profane or sacred, in all Sicily.
 Where then shall I begin rather than with that city which was above all others in your affection, and which was your chosen place of enjoyment?
or with what class of men rather than with your flatterers?
For by that means it will be the more easily seen how you behaved among those men who hate you, who accuse you, who will not let you rest, when you are proved to have plundered among the Mamertines, who are your friends, in the most infamous manner.
Caius Heius is a Mamertine all men will easily grant me this who have ever been to Messana; the most accomplished man in every point of view in all that city.
His house is the very best in all Messana, most thoroughly known, most constantly open, most especially hospitable to all our fellow-citizens.
That house before the arrival of Verres was so splendidly adorned, as to be an ornament even to the city.
For Messana itself, which is admirable on account of its situation, its fortifications, and its harbour, is very empty and bare of those things in which Verres delights.
There was in the house of Heius a private chapel of great sacredness, handed down to him from his ancestors, very ancient; in which he had four very beautiful statues, made with the greatest skill, and of very high character; calculated not only to delight Verres, that clever and accomplished man, but even any one of us whom he calls the mob:
one, a statue of Cupid, in marble, a work of Praxiteles; for in truth, while I have been inquiring into that man's conduct, I have learnt the names of the workmen;
it was the same workman, as I imagine, who made that celebrated Cupid of the same figure as this which is at Thespiae, on account of which people go to see Thespiae, for there is no other reason for going to see it;
and therefore that great man Lucius Mummius, when he carried away from that town the statues of the Muses which are now before the temple of Good Fortune, and the other statues which were not consecrated, did not touch this marble Cupid, because it had been consecrated.
But to return to that private chapel; there was this statue, which I am speaking of, of Cupid, made of marble.
On the other side there was a Hercules, beautifully made of brass;
that was said to be the work of Myron, as I believe, and it undoubtedly was so.
Also before those gods there were little altars, which might indicate to any one the holiness of the chapel.
There were besides two brazen statues, of no very great size, but of marvellous beauty, in the dress and robes of virgins, which with uplifted hands were supporting some sacred vessels which were placed on their heads, after the fashion of the Athenian virgins. They were called the Canephorae, but their maker was. (who?
who was he?
thank you, you are quite right, they called him Polycletus.
Whenever any one of our citizens went to Messana, he used to go and see these statues.
They were open every day for people to go to see them.
The house was not more an ornament to its master, than it was to the city.
Caius Claudius, whose aedileship we know to have been a most splendid affair, used this statue of Cupid, as long as he kept the forum decorated in honour of the immortal gods and the Roman people.
And as he was connected by ties of hospitality with the Heii, and was the patron of the Mamertine people, as he availed himself of their kindness to lend him this, so he was careful to restore it
There have lately been noble men of the same kind, O judges; why do I say lately,
Yes, we have seen some very lately, a very little while ago indeed, who have adorned the forum and the public buildings, not with the spoils of the provinces, but with ornaments belonging to their friends, with splendid things lent by their own connections, not with the produce of the thefts of guilty men, and who afterwards have restored the statues and decorations, each to its proper owner;
men who have not taken things away out of the cities of our allies for the sake of a four-day festival, under presence of the shows to be exhibited in their aedileship, and after that carried them off to their own homes, and their own villas.
All these statues which I have mentioned, O judges, Verres took away from Heius, out of his private chapel. Be left, I say, not one of those things, nor anything else, except one old wooden figure. Good Fortune, as I believe; that, forsooth, he did not choose to have in his house! Oh!
for the good faith of gods and men!
What is the meaning of all this?
What a cause is this?
What impudence is this!
The statues which I am speaking of, before they were taken away by you, no commander ever came to Messana without seeing
So many praetors, so many consuls as there have been in Sicily, in time of peace, and in time of war;
so many men of every sort as there have been I do not speak of upright, innocent, conscientious men, but so many covetous, so many audacious, so many infamous men as there have been, not one of them all was violent enough, or seemed to himself powerful enough or noble enough, to venture to ask for, or to take away, or even to touch anything in that chapel. Shall Verres take away everything which is most beautiful everywhere?
Shall it not be allowed to any one besides to have anything?
Shall that one house of his contain so many wealthy houses?
Was it for this reason that none of his predecessors ever touched these things, that he might be able to carry them off?
Was this the reason why Caius Claudius Pulcher restored them, that Caius Verres might be able to steal them?
But that Cupid had no wish for the house of a pimp and the establishment of a harlot; he was quite content to stay in that chapel where he was hereditary; he knew that he had been left to Heius by his ancestors, with the rest of the sacred things which he inherited; he did not require the heir of a prostitute.
But why am I borne on so impetuously?
I shall in a moment be refuted by one word.
I bought it, says he.
O ye immortal gods, what a splendid defence!
we sent a broker into the province with military command and with the forces, to buy up all the statues, all the paintings, all the silver plate and gold plate, and ivory, and jewels, and to leave nothing to any body.
For this defence seems to me to be got ready for everything; that he bought them.
In the first place, if I should grant to you that which you wish, namely, that you bought them, since against all this class of accusations you are going to use this defence alone, I ask what sort of tribunals you thought that there would be at Rome, if you thought that any one would grant you this, that you in your praetorship and in your command bought up so many and such valuable things, everything, in short, which was of any value in the whole province.
Remark the care of our ancestors, who as yet suspected no such conduct as this, but yet provided against the things which might happen in affairs of small importance.
They thought that no one who had gone as governor or as lieutenant into a province would be so insane as to buy silver, for that was given him out of the public funds;
or raiment, for that was afforded him by the laws; they thought he might buy a slave, a thing which we all use, and which is not provided by the laws.
They made a law, therefore, "that no one should buy a slave except in the room of a slave who was dead. "
If any slave had died at Rome?
For they did not mean you to furnish your house in the province, but to be of use to the province in its necessities.
What was the reason why they so carefully kept us from making purchases in the provinces?
This was it, O judges, because they thought it a robbery, not a purchase, when the seller was not allowed to sell on his own terms.
And they were aware that, in the provinces, if he who was there with the command and power of a governor wished to purchase what was in any one's possession, and was allowed to do so, it would come to pass that he would get whatever he chose, whether it was to be sold or not, at whatever price he pleased.
Some one will say, "Do not deal with Verres in that manner; do not try and examine his actions by the standard of old-fashioned conscientiousness; allow him to have bought them without being punished for it, provided he bought them in a fair way, not through any arbitrary exercise of power, nor from any one against his will, or by violence. " I will so deal with him.
If Heius had anything for sale, if he sold it for the price at which he valued it, I give up inquiring why you bought it.
 What then are we to do?
Are we to use arguments in a case of this sort?
We must ask, I suppose, whether Heius was in debt, whether he had an auction, if he had, whether he was in such difficulties about money matters, whether he was oppressed by such want, by such necessity, as to strip his private chapel, to sell his paternal gods.
But I see that the man had no auction; that he never sold anything except the produce of his land; that he not only had no debts, but that he had always abundance of ready money.
Even if all these things were contrary to what I say they were, still I say that he would not have sold things which had been so many years in the household and chapel of his ancestors.
What will you say if he was persuaded by the greatness of the sum given him for them?
It is not probable that a man, rich as he was, honourable as he was, should have preferred money to his own religious feelings and to the memorials of his ancestors.
"That may be, yet men are sometimes led away from their habits and principles by large sums of money. "
Let us see, then, how great a sum this was which could turn Heius, a man of exceeding riches, by no means covetous, away from decency, from affection, and from religion.
You ordered him, I suppose, to enter in his account books, "All these statues of Praxiteles, of Myron, of Polycletus, were sold to Verres for six thousand five hundred sesterces. "
Some one will say, "What!
do you value those things at a very high price?"
But I am not valuing them according to any calculation of my own, or any need which I have for them; but I think that the matter ought to be looked at by you in this light, what is the value of these things in the opinion of those men who are judges of these things; at what price they are accustomed to be sold; at what price these very things could be sold, if they were sold openly and freely; lastly, at what price Verres himself values them.
For he would never have been so foolish, if he had thought that Cupid worth only four hundred denarii, as to allow himself to be made a subject for the common conversation and general reproach of men.
Who then of you all is ignorant at how great a price these things are valued?
Have we not seen at an auction a brazen statue of no great size sold for a hundred and twenty thousand sesterces?
What if I were to choose to name men who have bought similar things for no less a price, or even for a higher one? Can I not do so?
In truth, the only limit to the valuation of such things is the desire which any one has for them, for it is difficult to set bounds to the price unless you first set bounds to the wish.
I see then that Heius was neither led by his inclination, nor by any temporary difficulties, nor by the greatness of the sum given, to sell these statues; and that you, under the presence of purchase which you put forward, in reality seized and took away these things by force, through fear, by your power and authority, from that man, whom, along with the rest of our allies in that country, the Roman people had entrusted not only to your power, but also to your upright exercise of it.
What can there be, judges, so desirable for me in making this charge, as that Heius should say this same thing?
Nothing certainly; but let us not wish for what is difficult to be obtained.
Heius is a Mamertine.
The state of the Mamertines alone, by a common resolution, praises that man in the name of the city.
To all the rest of the Sicilians he is an object of hatred; by the Mamertines alone is he liked. But of that deputation which has been sent to utter his praises, Heius is the chief man; in truth, he is the chief man of his city, and too much occupied in discharging the public duties imposed upon him to speak of his private injuries.
Though I was aware of and had given weight to these considerations, still, O judges, I trusted myself to Heius.
I produced him at the first pleading; and indeed I did it without any danger,
for what answer could Heius give even if he turned out a dishonest man, and unlike himself?
Could he say that these statues were at his house, and not with Verres?
How could he say anything of that sort?
If he were the basest of men, and were inclined to lie most shamelessly, he would say this; that he had had them for sale, and that he had sold them at the price he wanted for them.
The man the most noble in all his city, who was especially anxious that you should have a high opinion of his conscientiousness and of his worth, says first, that he spoke in Verres's praise by the public authority of his city, because that commission had been given to him;
secondly; that he had not had these things for sale, and that, if he had been allowed to do what he wished, he could never have been induced by any terms to sell those things which were in his private chapel, having been left to him and handed down to him from his ancestors.
 Why are you sitting there, O Verres?
What are you waiting for?
Why do you say that you are hemmed in and overwhelmed by the cities of Centuripa, of Catina, of Halesa, of Tyndaris, of Enna, of Agyrium, and by all the other cities of Sicily?
Your second country, as you used to call it, Messana herself attacks you; your own Messana I say; the assistant in your crimes, the witness of your lusts, the receiver of your booty and your thefts.
For the most honourable man of that city is present, a deputy sent from his home on account of this very trial, the chief actor in the panegyric on you;
who praises you by the public order of his city, for so he has been charged and commanded to do. Although you recollect, O judges, what he answered when he was asked about the ship; that it had been built by public labour, at the public expense, and that a Mamertine senator had been appointed by the public authority to superintend its building.
Heius in his private capacity flees to you for aid, O judges; he avails himself of this law, the common fortress of our allies, by which this tribunal is established.
Although there is a law for recovering money which has been unjustly extorted, he says that he does not seem to recover any money; which though it has been taken from him, he does not so much care about: but he says he does demand back from you the sacred images belonging to his ancestors, he does demand back from you his hereditary household god?
Have you any shame, O Verres? have you any religion?
have you any fear, You have lived in Heius's house at Messana; you saw him almost daily performing sacred rites in his private chapel before those gods.
He is not influenced by money; he does not even ask to have those things restored which were merely ornaments.
Keep the Canephorae; restore the images of the gods.
And because he said this, because after a given time he, an ally and friend of the Roman people, addressed his complaints to you in a moderate tone, because he was very attentive to religious obligation not only while demanding back his paternal gods, but also in giving his evidence on oath;
know that one of the deputies has been sent back to Messana, that very man who superintended the building of that ship at the public expense, to demand from the senate that Heius should be condemned to an ignominious punishment.
O most insane of men, what did you think?
that you should obtain what you requested?
Did you not know how greatly he was esteemed by his fellow-citizens; how great his influence was considered?
But suppose you had obtained your request; suppose that the Mamertines had passed any severe vote against Heius, what do you think would have been the authority of their panegyric, if they had decreed punishment to the man who it was notorious had given true evidence?
Although, what sort of praise is that, when he who utters it, being questioned, is compelled to give answers injurious to him whom he is praising?
What!
are not those who are praising you, my witnesses?
Heius is an encomiast of yours; he has done you the most serious injury.
I will bring forward the rest; they will gladly be silent about all that they are allowed to suppress; they will say what they cannot help saying, unwillingly.
Can they deny that a transport of the largest size was built for that man at Messana?
Let them deny it if they can.
Can they deny that a Mamertine senator was appointed by the public authority to superintend the building of that ship?
I wish they would deny it.
There are other points also which I prefer reserving unmentioned at present, in order to give as little time as possible to them for planning and arranging their perjury.
Let this praise, then, be placed to your account;
let these men come to your relief with their authority, who neither ought to help you if they were able, nor could do so if they wished; on whom in their private capacity you have inflicted many injuries, and put many affronts, while in their city you have dishonoured many families for ever by your adulteries and crimes "But you have been of public service to their city.
Not without great injury to the republic and to the province of Sicily.
They were bound to supply and they used to supply sixty thousand modii of wheat to the Roman people for payment; that was remitted by you of your own sole authority.
The republic was injured because by your means its right of dominion over one city was disparaged; the Sicilians were injured, because this quantity was not deducted from the total amount of the corn to be provided by the island, but was only transferred to the cities of Centuripa and Halesa, whose inhabitants were exempt from that tax; and on them a greater burden was imposed than they were able to bear.
It was your duty to require them to furnish a ship, in compliance with the treaty. You remitted it for three years.
During all those years you never demanded one soldier.
You acted as pirates are accustomed to act, who, though they are the common enemies of all men, still select some friends, whom they not only spare, but even enrich with their booty; and especially such as have a town in a convenient situation, where they often, and sometimes even necessarily, put in with their vessels.
The town of Phaselis, which Publius Servilius took, had not been in former times a city of Cilicians and pirates.
The Lycians, a Greek tribe, inhabited it;
but because it was in such a situation as it was, and because it projected into the sea, so that pirates from Cilicia often necessarily touched at it when departing on an expedition, and were also often borne thither on their retreats, the pirates connected that city with themselves; at first by commercial intercourse, and afterwards by a regular alliance.
The city of the Mamertines was not formerly of bad character; it was even a city hostile to dishonest men, and detained the luggage of Caius Cato, the one who was consul.
But then what sort of a man was he?
a most eminent and most influential man; who however, though he had been consul, was convicted.
So Caius Cato, the grandson of two most illustrious men, Lucius Paullus and Marcus Cato, and the son of the sister of Publius Africanus; who, even when convicted, at a time when severe judgments were in the habit of being passed, found the damages to which he was liable only estimated at eighteen thousand sesterces;
with this man, I say, the Mamertines were angry, who have often expended a greater sum than the damages in the action against Cato were laid at, in one banquet for Timarchides.
But this city was the Phaselis for that robber and pirate of Sicily.
Hither everything was brought from all quarters; with them it was left; whatever required to be concealed, they kept separate and stored away.
By their agency he contrived everything which he wished put on board ship privately, and exported secretly; and in their harbour he contrived to have a vessel of the largest size built for him to send to Italy loaded with plunder.
In return for these services, he gave them immunity from all expense, all labour, all military service, in short, from everything.
For three years they were the only people, not only in Sicily, but, according to my opinion, in the whole world at such a time, who enjoyed excuse, relief, freedom, and immunity from every sort of expense, and trouble, and office.
Hence arose that Verrean festival;
hence it was that he ventured to order Sextus Cominius to be dragged before him at a banquet, at whom he attempted to throw a goblet, whom he ordered to be seized by the throat, and to be hurried from the banquet and thrown into a dark prison; hence came that cross, on which, in the sight of many men, he suspended a Roman citizen; that cross which he never ventured to erect anywhere except among that people, whom he had made sharers in all his crimes and robberies.
Do you dare to come to praise any one?
By what authority?
by that which you ought to have with the Senatorial order? by that which you ought to have with the Roman people?
Is there any city, not only in our provinces, but in the most distant nations, either so powerful, or so free, or so savage and uncivilized? is there any king, who would not invite a Senator of the Roman people to his house and to his home?
An honour which is paid not only to the man, but in the first place to the Roman people, by whose indulgence we have risen to this order, and secondly to the authority of this order; and unless that is respected among our allies, where will be the name and dignity of the empire among foreign nations?
The Mamertines did not give me any public invitation when I say me, that is a trifle, but when they did not invite a Senator of the Roman people, they withheld an honour due not to the man but to his order.
For to Tullius himself, the most splendid and magnificent house of Cnaeus Pompeius Basilicus was opened; with whom he would have lodged even if he had been invited by you. There was also the most honourable house of the Percennii, who are now also called Pompeius; where Lucius my brother lodged and was received by them with the greatest eagerness.
A Senator of the Roman people, as far as depended on you as a body, lay in your town, and passed the night in the public streets.
No other city ever did such a thing.
Yes, say you, "for you were instituting a prosecution against our friend.
" Will you put your own interpretation on what private business I have of my own, by diminishing the honour due to the Senate?	"
But I will make my complaint of this conduct, if ever the time comes that there is any discussion concerning you among that body, which, up to this time, has been affronted by no one but you.
With what face have you presented yourself before the eyes of the Roman people?
when you have not yet pulled down that cross, which is even now stained with the blood of a Roman citizen, which is fixed up in your city by the harbour, and have not thrown it into the sea and purified all that place, before you came to Rome, and before this tribunal.
On the territory of the Mamertines, connected with us by treaty, at peace with us, is that monument of your cruelty raised.
Is not your city the only one where, when any one arrives at it from Italy, he sees the cross of a Roman citizen before he sees any friend of the Roman people?
which you are in the habit of displaying to the people of Rhegium, whose city you envy, and to your inhabitants, Roman citizens as they are, to make them think less of themselves, and be less inclined to despise you, when they see the privileges of our citizenship extinguished by such a punishment.
But you say you bought these things?
What?
did you forget to purchase of the same Heius that Attalic tapestry, celebrated over the whole of Sicily?
You might have bought them in the same way as you did the statues.
For what did you do?
Did you wish to spare the account books?
This escaped the notice of that stupid man; he thought that what he stole from the wardrobe would be less notorious than what he had stolen from the private chapel.
But how did he get it?
I cannot relate it more plainly than Heius himself related it before you.
When I asked, whether any other part of his property had come to Verres, he answered that he had sent him orders to send the tapestry to Agrigentum to him.
I asked whether he had sent it. He replied as he must, that is, that he had been obedient to the praetor; that he had sent it.
I asked whether it had arrived at Agrigentum; he said it had arrived.
I asked in what condition it had returned; he said it had not returned yet.
There was a laugh and a murmur from all the people.
Did it never occur to you in this instance to order him to make an entry in his books, that he had sold you this tapestry too, for six thousand five hundred sesterces?
Did you fear that your debts would increase, if these things were to cost you six thousand five hundred sesterces, which you could easily sell for two hundred thousand?
It was worth that, believe me.
You would have been able to defend yourself if you had given that sum for it.
No one would then have asked how much it was worth. If you could only prove that you had bought it, you could easily make your cause and your conduct appear reasonable to any one. But as it is, you have no way of getting out of your difficulty about the tapestry.
What shall I say next?
Did you take away by force some splendid harness, which is said to have belonged to King Hiero, from Philarchus of Centuripa, a wealthy and high-born man, or did you buy it of him?
When I was in Sicily, this is what I heard from the Centuripans and from everybody else, for the case was very notorious; people said that you had taken away this harness from Philarchus of Centuripa, and other very beautiful harness from Aristus of Panormus, and a third set from Gratippus of Tyndarus.
Indeed, if Philarchus had sold it to you, you would not, after the prosecution was instituted against you, have promised to restore it.
But because you saw that many people knew of it, you thought that if you restored it to him, you would only have so much the less, but the original transaction would be proved against you nevertheless; and so you did not restore it.
Philarchus said in his evidence, that when he became acquainted with this disease of yours, as your friends call it, he wished to conceal from you the knowledge of the existence of this harness; that when he was summoned by you, he said that he had not got any; and indeed, that he had removed them to another person's house, that they might not be found; but that your instinct was so great, that you saw them by the assistance of the very man in whose custody they were deposited;
that then he could not deny that you had found him out, and so that the harness was taken from him against his will, and without any payment.
Now, O judges, it is worth your while to know how he was accustomed to find and trace out all these things.
There are two brothers, citizens of Cibyra, Tlepolemus and Hiero, one of whom, I believe, was accustomed to model in wax, the other was a painter.
I fancy these men, as they had become suspected by their fellow-citizens of having plundered the temple of Apollo at Cibyra, fearing a trial and the punishment of the law, had fled from their homes.
As they had known that Verres was a great connoisseur of such works as theirs, at the time that he, as you learnt from the witnesses, came to Cibyra with fictitious bills of exchange, they, when flying from their homes as exiles, came to him when he was in Asia.
He has kept them with him ever since that time; and in the robberies he committed, and in the booty he acquired during his lieutenancy, he greatly availed himself of their assistance and their advice.
These are the men who were meant when Quintus Tadius made an entry in his books that he had given things by Verres's order to some Greek painters.
They were already well known to, and had been thoroughly tried by him, when he took them with him into Sicily.
And when they arrived there, they scented cut and tracked everything in so marvellous a manner, (you might have thought they were bloodhounds,) that, wherever anything was they found it out by some means or other.
Some things they found out by threatening, some by promising; this by means of slaves, that through freemen; one thing by a friend, another by an enemy. Whatever pleased them was sure to be lost.
They whose plate was demanded had nothing else to hope, than that Tlepolemus and Hiero might not approve of it.
I will relate to you this fact, O judges, most truly.
I recollect that Pamphilus of Lilybaeum, a connection of mine by ties of hospitality, and a personal friend of mine, a man of the highest birth, told me, that when that man had taken from him, by his absolute power, an ewer made by the hand of Boethus, of exquisite workmanship and great weight, he went home very sad in truth, and greatly agitated,
because a vessel of that sort, which had been left to him by his father and his forefathers, and which he was accustomed to use on days of festival, and on the arrival of ancient friends, had been taken from him.
While I was sitting at home, said he, in great indignation, up comes one of the slaves of Venus; he orders me immediately to bring to the praetor some embossed goblets.
I was greatly vexed, said he; I had two; I order them both to be taken out of the closet, lest any worse thing should happen, and to be brought after me to the praetor's house.
When I got there the praetor was asleep; the Cibyratic brothers were walking about,
and when they saw me, they said, Pamphilus, where are the cups?
I show them with great grief; they praise them.
I begin to complain that I shall have nothing left of any value at all, if my cups too were taken away.
Then they, when they see me vexed, say, What are you willing to give us to prevent these from being taken from you?
To make my story short, I said that I would give six hundred sesterces.
Meantime the praetor summons us; he asks for the cups.
Then they began to say to the praetor, that they had thought from what they had heard, that Pamphilus's cups were of some value, but that they were miserable things, quite unworthy of Verres's having them among his plate.
He said, he thought so too.
So Pamphilus saved his exquisite goblets.
And indeed, before I heard this, though I knew that it was a very trifling sort of accomplishment to understand things of that sort, yet I used to wonder that he had any knowledge of them at all, as I knew that in nothing whatever had he any qualities like a man.
But when I heard this, I then for the first time understood that that was the use of these two Cibyratic brothers; that in his robberies he used his own hands, but their eyes.
But he was so covetous of that splendid reputation of being thought to be a judge of such matters, that lately, (just observe the man's madness,)
after his case was adjourned, when he was already as good as condemned, and civilly dead, at the time of the games of the circus, when early in the morning the couches were spread in preparation for a banquet at the house of Lucius Sisenna, a man of the first consideration, and when the plate was all set out, and when, as was suited to the dignity of Lucius Sisenna, the house was full of honourable men, he came to the plate, and began in a leisurely way to examine and consider every separate piece.
"Still another instance of conjectural divination occurred in the case of Dionysius, a little while before lie began to reign.
He was travelling through the Leontine district, and led his horse down into a river.
The horse was engulfed in a whirlpool and disappeared.
Dionysius did his utmost to extricate him but in vain and, so Philistus writes, went away greatly troubled.
When he had gone on a short distance he heard a whinny, looked back and, to his joy, saw his horse eagerly following and with a swarm of bees in its mane.
The sequel of this portent was that Dionysius began to reign within a few days.
"Again: what a warning was given to the Spartans just before the disastrous battle of Leuctra, when the armour clanked in the temple of Hercules and his statue dripped with sweat!
But at the same time, according to Callisthenes, the folding doors of Hercules' temple at Thebes, though closed with bars, suddenly opened of their own accord, and the armour which had been fastened on the temple walls was found on the floor.
And, at the same time, at Lebadia, in Boeotia, while divine honours were being paid to Trophonius, the cocks in the neighbourhood began to crow vigorously and did not leave off.
Thereupon the Boeotian augurs declared that the victory belonged to the Thebans, because it was the habit of cocks to keep silence when conquered and to crow when victorious.
"The Spartans received many warnings given at that time of their impending defeat at Leuctra.
For example, a crown of wild, prickly herbs suddenly appeared on the head of the statue erected at Delphi in honour of Lysander, the most eminent of the Spartans.
Furthermore, the Spartans had set up some golden stars in the temple of Castor and Pollux at Delphi to commemorate the glorious victory of Lysander over the Athenians, because, it was said, those gods were seen accompanying the Spartan fleet in that battle.
Now, just before the battle of Leuctra these divine symbols that is, the golden stars at Delphi, already referred to fell down and were never seen again.
But the most significant warning received by the Spartans was this: they sent to consult the oracle of Jupiter at Dodona as to the chances of victory.
After their messengers had duly set up the vessel in which were the lots, an ape, kept by the king of Molossia for his amusement, disarranged the lots and everything else used in consulting the oracle, and scattered them in all directions.
Then, so we are told, the priestess who had charge of the oracle said that the Spartans must think of safety and not of victory.
"Again, did not Gaius Flaminius by his neglect of premonitory signs in his second consulship in the Second Punic War cause great disaster to the State?
For, after a review of his army, he had moved his camp and was marching towards Arretium to meet Hannibal, when his horse, for no apparent reason, suddenly fell with him just in front of the statue of Jupiter Stator.
Although the soothsayers considered this a divine warning not to join battle, he did not so regard it.
Again, after the auspices by means of the tripudium had been taken the keeper of the sacred chickens advised the postponement of battle.
Flaminius then asked,' Suppose the chickens should never eat, what would you advise in that case?'
Fine auspices indeed!' said Flaminius, 'for they counsel action when chickens' crops are empty and inaction when chickens' crops are filled.'
So he ordered the standards to be plucked up and the army to follow him.
Then, when the standard-bearer of the first company could not loosen his standard, several soldiers came to his assistance, but to no purpose.
This fact was reported to Flaminius, and he, with his accustomed obstinacy, ignored it.
The consequence was that within three hours his army was cut to pieces and he himself was slain.
Coelius has added the further notable fact that, at the very time this disastrous battle was going on, earthquakes of such violence occurred in Liguria, in Gaul, on several islands, and in every part of Italy, that a large number of towns were destroyed, landslips took place in many regions, the earth sank, rivers flowed upstream, and the sea invaded their channels.
"Trustworthy conjectures in divining are made by experts.
For instance, when Midas, the famous king of Phrygia, was a child, ants filled his mouth with grains of wheat as he slept.
It was predicted that he would be a very wealthy man; and so it turned out.
Again, while Plato was an infant, asleep in his cradle, bees settled on his lips and this was interpreted to mean that he would have a rare sweetness of speech.
Hence in his infancy his future eloquence was foreseen.
And what about your beloved and charming friend Roscius?
Did he lie or did the whole of Lanuvium lie for him in telling the following incident:
In his cradle days, while he was being reared in Solonium, a plain in the Lanuvian district, his nurse suddenly awoke during the night and by the light of a lamp observed the child asleep with a snake coiled about him.
She was greatly frightened at the sight and gave an alarm.
His father referred the occurrence to the soothsayers, who replied that the boy would attain unrivalled eminence and glory.
Indeed, Pasiteles has engraved the scene in silver and our friend Archias has described it in verse.
"Then what do we expect?
Do we wait for the immortal gods to converse with us in the forum, on the street, and in our homes?
While they do not, of course, present themselves in person, they do diffuse their power far and wide sometimes enclosing it in caverns of the earth and sometimes imparting it to human beings.
The Pythian priestess at Delphi was inspired by the power of the earth and the Sibyl by that of nature.
Why need you marvel at this?
Do we not see how the soils of the earth vary in kind?
Some are deadly, like that about Lake Ampsanctus in the country of the Hirpini and that of Plutonia in Asia, both of which I have seen.
Even in the same neighbourhood, some parts are salubrious and some are not; some produce men of keen wit, others produce fools.
These diverse effects are all the result of differences in climate and differences in the earth's exhalations.
It often happens, too, that the soul is violently stirred by the sight of some object, or by the deep tones of a voice, or by singing.
Did rave like one by Bacchic rites made mad And mid the tombs her Teucer called aloud.
"And poetic inspiration also proves that there is a divine power within the human soul.
Democritus says that no one can be a great poet without being in a state of frenzy, and Plato says the same thing.
Let Plato call it 'frenzy' if he will, provided he praises it as it was praised in his Phaedrus.
Can the delivery of you lawyers be impassioned, weighty, and fluent unless your soul is deeply stirred?
Upon my word, many a time have I seen in you such passion of look and gesture that I thought some power was rendering you unconscious of what you did; and, if I may cite a less striking example, I have seen the same in your friend Aesopus.
"Frequently, too, apparitions present themselves and, though they have no real substance, they seem to have.
This is illustrated by what is said to have happened to Brennus and to his Gallic troops after he had made an impious attack on the temple of Apollo at Delphi.
The story is that the Pythian priestess, in speaking from the oracle, said to Brennus:
To this the virgins white and I will see.
The result was that the virgins were seen fighting against the Gauls, and their army was overwhelmed with snow.
"Aristotle thought that even the people who rave from the effects of sickness and are called 'hypochondriacs' have within their souls some power of foresight and of prophecy.
But, for my part, I am inclined to think that such a power is not to be attributed either to a diseased stomach or to a disordered brain.
On the contrary, it is the healthy soul and not the sickly body that has the power of divination.
The Stoics, for example, establish the existence of divination by the following process of reasoning:
"'If there are gods and they do not make clear to man in advance what the future will be, then they do not love man; or, they themselves do not know what the future will be; or, they think that it is of no advantage to man to know what it will be; or, they think it inconsistent with their dignity to give man forewarnings of the future; or, finally, they, though gods, cannot give intelligible signs of coming events.
But it is not true that the gods do not love us, for they are the friends and benefactors of the human race; nor is it true that they do not know their own decrees and their own plans; nor is it true that it is of no advantage to us to know what is going to happen, since we should be more prudent if we knew nor is it true that the gods think it inconsistent with their dignity to give forecasts, since there is no more excellent quality than kindness; nor is it true that they have not the power to know the future; therefore it is not true that there are gods and yet that they do not give us signs of the future; but there are gods, therefore they give us such signs; and if they give such signs, it is not true that they give us no means to understand those signs otherwise their signs would be useless; and if they give us the means, it is not true that there is no divination; therefore there is divination.'
"Chrysippus, Diogenes, and Antipater employ the same reasoning.
Then what ground is there to doubt the absolute truth of my position?
For I have on my side reason, facts, peoples, and races, both Greek and barbarian, our own ancestors, the unvarying belief of all ages, the greatest philosophers, the poets, the wisest men, the builders of cities, and the founders of republics.
Are we not satisfied with the unanimous judgement of men, and do we wait for beasts to give their testimony too?
The truth is that no other argument of any sort is advanced to show the futility of the various kinds of divination which I have mentioned except the fact that it is difficult to give the cause or reason of every kind of divination.
You ask, 'Why is it that the soothsayer, when he finds a cleft in the lung of the victim, even though the other vitals are sound, stops the execution of an undertaking and defers it to another day?'
'Why does an augur think it a favourable omen when a raven flies to the right, or a crow to the left?'
'Why does an astrologer consider that the moon's conjunction with the planets Jupiter and Venus at the birth of children is a favourable omen, and its conjunction with Saturn or Mars unfavourable?'
Again, 'Why does God warn us when we are asleep and fail to do so when we are awake?'
Finally, 'Why is it that mad Cassandra foresees coming events and wise Priam cannot do the same?'
"You ask why everything happens.
You have a perfect right to ask, but that is not the point at issue now.
The question is, Does it happen, or does it not?
For example, if I were to say that the magnet attracted iron and drew it to itself, and I could not tell you why, then I suppose you would utterly deny that the magnet had any such power.
At least that is the course you pursue in regard to the existence of the power of divination, although it is established by our own experience and that of others, by our reading and by the traditions of our forefathers.
Why, even before the dawn of philosophy, which is a recent discovery, the average man had no doubt about divination, and, since its development, no philosopher of any sort of reputation has had any different view.
I have already cited Pythagoras, Democritus, and Socrates and, of the ancients, I have excluded no one except Xenophanes.
To them I have added the Old Academy, the Peripatetics; and the Stoics.
The only dissenter is Epicurus.
But why wonder at that? for is his opinion of divination any more discreditable than his view that there is no such thing as a disinterested virtue?
"But is there a man anywhere who is uninfluenced by clear and unimpeachable records signed and sealed by the hand of Time?
For example, Homer writes that Calchas was by far the best augur among the Greeks and that he commanded the Greek fleet before Troy.
His command of the fleet I suppose was due to his skill as an augur and not to his skill in seamanship.
Amphilochus and Mopsus were kings of Argos, but they were augurs too, and they founded Greek cities on the coasts of Cilicia.
And even before them were Amphiaraus and Tiresias.
They were no lowly and unknown men, nor were they like the persons described by Ennius, Who, for their own gain, uphold opinions that are false,
but they were eminent men of the noblest type and foretold the future by means of augural signs.
In speaking of Tiresias, even when in the infernal regions, Homer says that he alone was wise, that the rest were mere wandering shadows.
As for Amphiaraus, his reputation in Greece was such that he was honoured as a god, and oracular responses were sought in the place where he was buried.
"Furthermore, did not Priam, the Asiatic king, have a son, Helenus, and a daughter, Cassandra, who prophesied, the first by means of auguries and the other when under a heaven-inspired excitement and exaltation of soul?
In the same class, as we read in the records of our forefathers, were those famous Marcian brothers, men of noble birth.
And does not Homer relate that Polyidus of Corinth not only made many predictions to others, but that he also foretold the death of his own son, who was setting out for Troy?
As a general rule among the ancients the men who ruled the state had control likewise of augury, for they considered divining, as well as wisdom, becoming to a king.
Proof of this is afforded by our State wherein the kings were augurs; and, later, private citizens endowed with the same priestly office ruled the republic by the authority of religion.
"Nor is the practice of divination disregarded even among uncivilized tribes, if indeed there are Druids in Gaul and there are, for I knew one of them myself, Divitiacus, the Aeduan, your guest and eulogist.
He claimed to have that knowledge of nature which the Greeks call ' physiologia,' and he used to make predictions, sometimes by means of augury and sometimes by means of conjecture.
Among the Persians the augurs and diviners are the magi, who assemble regularly in a sacred place for practice and consultation, just as formerly you augurs used to do on the Nones.
Indeed, no one can become king of the Persians until he has learned the theory and the practice of the magi.
Moreover, you may see whole families and tribes devoted to this art.
For example, Telmessus in Caria is a city noted for its cultivation of the soothsayer's art, and there is also Elis in Peloponnesus, which has permanently set aside two families as soothsayers, the Iamidae and the Clutidae, who are distinguished for superior skill in their art.
In Syria the Chaldeans are pre-eminent for their knowledge of astronomy and for their quickness of mind.
"Again, the Etrurians are very skilful in observing thunderbolts, in interpreting their meaning and that of every sign and portent.
That is why, in the days of our forefathers, it was wisely decreed by the Senate, when its power was in full vigour, that, of the sons of the chief men, six should be handed over to each of the Etruscan tribes for the study of divination, in order that so important a profession should not, on account of the poverty of its members, be withdrawn from the influence of religion, and converted into a means of mercenary gain.
On the other hand the Phrygians, Pisidians, Cilicians, and Arabians rely chiefly on the signs conveyed by the flights of birds, and the Umbrians, according to tradition, used to do the same.
"Now, for my part, I believe that the character of the country determined the kind of divination which its inhabitants adopted.
For example, the Egyptians and Babylonians, who live on the level surface of open plains, with no hills to obstruct a view of the sky, have devoted their attention wholly to astrology.
But the Etruscans, being in their nature of a very ardent religious temperament and accustomed to the frequent sacrifice of victims, have given their chief attention to the study of entrails.
And as on account of the density of the atmosphere signs from heaven were common among them, and furthermore since that atmospheric condition caused many phenomena both of earth and sky and also certain prodigies that occur in the conception and birth of men and cattle for these reasons the Etruscans have become very proficient in the interpretation of portents.
Because they make manifest, portend, intimate,predict,they are called ' manifestations,' ' portents,' ' intimations,' and 'prodigies.'
But the Arabians, Phrygians, and Cilicians, being chiefly engaged in the rearing of cattle, are constantly wandering over the plains and mountains in winter and summer and, on that account, have found it quite easy to study the songs and flights of birds.
The same is true of the Pisidians and of our fellowcountrymen, the Umbrians.
While the Carians, and especially the Telmessians, already mentioned, because they live in a country with a very rich and prolific soil, whose fertility produces many abnormal growths, have turned their attention to the study of prodigies.
"But who fails to observe that auspices and all other kinds of divination flourish best in the best regulated states?
And what king or people has there ever been who did not employ divination?
I do not mean in time of peace only, but much more even in time of war, when the strife and struggle for safety is hardest.
Passing by our own countrymen, who do nothing in war without examining entrails and nothing in peace without taking the auspices, let us look at the practice of foreign nations
The Athenians, for instance, in every public assembly always had present certain priestly diviners, whom they call manteis.
The Spartans assigned an augur to their kings as a judicial adviser, and they also enacted that an augur should be present in their Council of Elders, which is the name of their Senate.
In matters of grave concern they always consulted the oracle at Delphi, or that of Jupiter Hammon or that of Dodona.
Lycurgus himself, who once governed the Spartan state, established his laws by authority of Apollo's Delphic oracle, and Lysander, who wished to repeal them, was prevented from doing so by the religious scruples of the people.
Moreover, the Spartan rulers, not content with their deliberations when awake, used to sleep in a shrine of Pasiphae which is situated in a field near the city, in order to dream there, because they believed that oracles received in repose were true.
"I now return to instances at home.
How many times the Senate has ordered the decemvirs to consult the Sibylline books!
How often in matters of grave concern it has obeyed the responses of the soothsayers!
Take the following examples: When at one time, two suns and, at another, three moons were seen; when meteors appeared; when the sun shone at night; when rumblings were heard in the heavens; when the sky seemed to divide, showing balls of fire enclosed within; again, on the occasion of the landslip in Privernum, report of which was made to the Senate; and when Apulia was shaken by a most violent earthquake and the land sank to an incredible depth
in all these cases of portents which warned the Roman people of mighty wars and deadly revolutions, the responses of the soothsayers were in agreement with the Sibylline verses.
As when, for example, the statue of Apollo at Cumae and that of Victory at Capua dripped with sweat;
when that unlucky prodigy, the hermaphrodite, was born;
when the river Atratus ran with blood;
when there were showers frequently of stone, sometimes of blood, occasionally of earth and even of milk;
and finally, when lightning struck the statue of the Centaur on the Capitoline hill, the gates and some people on the Aventine and the temples of Castor and Pollux at Tusculum and of Piety at Rome in each of these cases did not the soothsayers give prophetic responses which were afterwards fulfilled?
And were not these same prophecies found in the Sibylline books?
"In recent times, during the Marsian war, the temple of Juno Sospita was restored because of a dream of Caecilia, the daughter of Quintus Caecilius Metellus.
This is the same dream that Sisenna discussed as marvellous, in that its prophecies were fulfilled to the letter, and yet later influenced no doubt by some petty Epicureanhe goes on inconsistently to maintain that dreams are not worthy of belief.
This writer, however, has nothing to say against prodigies; in fact he relates that, at the outbreak of the Marsian War, the statues of the gods dripped with sweat, rivers ran with blood, the heavens opened, voices from unknown sources were heard predicting dangerous wars, and finally the sign considered by the soothsayers the most ominous of all the shields at Lanuvium were gnawed by mice.
During the Veientian War, when Lake Albanus had overflowed its banks, a certain nobleman of Veii deserted to us and said that, according to the prophecies of the Veientian books, their city could not be taken while the lake was at flood, and that if its waters were permitted to overflow and take their own course to the sea the result would be disastrous to the Roman people; on the other hand, if the waters were drained off in such a way that they did not reach the sea the result would be to our advantage.
In consequence of this announcement our forefathers dug that marvellous canal to drain off the waters from the Alban lake.
Later when the Veientians had grown weary of war and had sent ambassadors to the Senate to treat for peace, one of them is reported to have said that the deserter had not dared to tell the whole of the prophecy contained in the Veientian books, for those books, he said, also foretold the early capture of Rome by the Gauls, And this, as we know, did occur six years after the fall of Veii.
"Again, we are told that fauns have often been heard in battle and that during turbulent times truly prophetic messages have been sent from mysterious places.
Out of many instances of this class I shall give only two, but they are very striking.
Not long before the capture of the city by the Gauls, a voice, issuing from Vesta's sacred grove, which slopes from the foot of the Palatine Hill to the New Road, was heard to say, 'the walls and gates must be repaired; unless this is done the city will be taken.'
Neglect of this warning, while it was possible to heed it, was atoned for after the supreme disaster had occurred; for, adjoining the grove, an altar, which is now to be seen enclosed with a hedge, was dedicated to Aius the Speaker.
The other illustration has been reported by many writers.
At the time of the earthquake a voice came from Juno's temple on the citadel commanding that an expiatory sacrifice be made of a pregnant sow.
From this fact the goddess was called Juno the Adviser.
Are we, then, lightly to regard these warnings which the gods have sent and our forefathers adjudged to be trustworthy?
"Nor is it only to the voices of the gods that the Pythagoreans have paid regard but also to the utterances of men which they term 'omens.'
Our ancestors, too, considered such 'omens' worthy of respect, and for that reason, before entering upon any business enterprise, used to say, ' May the issue be prosperous, propitious, lucky, and successful.'
At public celebrations of religious rites they gave the command, 'Guard your tongues'; and in issuing the order for the Latin festival the customary injunction was, ' Let the people refrain from strife and quarrelling.'
So too, when the sacred ceremony of purification was held by one starting on an expedition to found a colony, or when the commander-in-chief was reviewing his army, or the censor was taking his census, it was the rule to choose men with names of good omen to lead the victims.
Furthermore, the consuls in making a levy of troops take pains to see that the first soldier enlisted is one with a lucky name.
You, of course, are aware that you, both as consul at home and later as commander in the field, employed the same precaution with the most scrupulous care.
In the case, too, of the prerogative tribe or century, our forefathers determined that it should be the 'omen' of a proper election.
"Now let me give some well-known examples of omens: When Lucius Paulus was consul the second time, and had been chosen to wage war against King Perses, upon returning home on the evening of the day on which he had been appointed, he noticed, as he kissed his little daughter Tertia (at that time a very small child), that she was rather sad.
'What is the matter, Tertia, my dear?
Why are you sad?'
'Oh! father, Persa is dead.'
Paulus clasped the child in a closer embrace and said, 'Daughter, I accept that as an omen.'
Now ' Persa' was the name of a little dog that had died.
I heard Lucius Flaccus, the high priest of Mars, relate the following story: Metellus' daughter, Caecilia, who was desirous of arranging a marriage for her sister's daughter, went, according to the ancient custom, to a small chapel to receive an omen.
A long time passed while the maiden stood and Caecilia was seated on a chair without any word being spoken.
Finally, the former grew weary and said to her aunt: 'Let me sit awhile on your chair.'
'Certainly, my child,' said Caecilia, 'you may have my place.'
And this was an omen of what came to pass, for in a short time Caecilia died and the girl married her aunt's husband.
I realize perfectly well that the foregoing omens may be lightly regarded and even be laughed at, but to make light of signs sent by the gods is nothing less than to disbelieve in the existence of the gods.
"Why need I speak of augurs?
That is your role; the duty to defend auspices, I maintain, is yours.
For it was to you, while you were consul, that the augur Appius Claudius declared that because the augury of safety was unpropitious a grievous and violent civil war was at hand.
That war began a few months later, but you brought it to an end in still fewer days.
Appius is one augur of whom I heartily approve, for not content merely with the sing-song ritual of augury, he, alone, according to the record of many years, has maintained a real system of divination.
I know that your colleagues used to laugh at him and call him at one time ' a Pisidian ' and at another ' a Soran.'
They did not concede to augury any power of prevision or real knowledge of the future, and used to say that it was a superstitious practice shrewdly invented to gull the ignorant.
But the truth is far otherwise, for neither those herdsmen whom Romulus governed, nor Romulus himself, could have had cunning enough to invent miracles with which to mislead the people.
It is the trouble and hard work involved in mastering the art that has induced this eloquent contempt; for men prefer to say glibly that there is nothing in auspices rather than to learn what auspices are.
"Now to employ you as often as I can as my authority what could be more clearly of divine origin than the auspice which is thus described in your Marius?
Behold, from out the tree, on rapid wing, The eagle that attends high-thundering Jove A serpent bore, whose fangs had wounded her;
And as she flew her cruel talons pierced Quite through its flesh.
The snake, tho' nearly dead, Kept darting here and there its spotted head;
And, as it writhed, she tore with bloody beak Its twisted folds.
At last, with sated wrath And grievous wounds avenged, she dropped her prey, Which, dead and mangled, fell into the sea;
And from the West she sought the shining East.
When Marius, reader of divine decrees, Observed the bird's auspicious, gliding course, He recognized the goodly sign foretold That he in glory would return to Rome;
Then, on the left, Jove's thunder pealed aloud And thus declared the eagle's omen true.
"As for that augural art of Romulus of which I spoke, it was pastoral and not city-bred, nor was it 'invented to gull the ignorant,' but received by trustworthy men, who handed it on to their descendants.
And so we read in Ennius the following story of Romulus, who was an augur, and of his brother Remus, who also was an augur:
When each would rule they both at once appealed Their claims, with anxious hearts, to augury.
Then Remus took the auspices alone And waited for the lucky bird;
while on The lofty Aventine fair Romulus His quest did keep to wait the soaring tribe:
Their contest would decide the city's name As Rome or Remora.
The multitude Expectant looked to learn who would be king.
As, when the consul is about to give The sign to start the race, the people sit With eyes intent on barrier doors from whose
Embellished jaws the chariots soon will come;
So now the people, fearful, looked for signs To know whose prize the mighty realm would be.
Meantime the fading sun into the shades Of night withdrew and then the shining dawn Shot forth its rays.
'Twas then an augury, The best of all, appeared on high a bird That on the left did fly.
And, as the sun Its golden orb upraised, twelve sacred birds Flew down from heaven and betook themselves To stations set apart for goodly signs.
Then Romulus perceived that he had gained A throne whose source and prop was augury.
"But let us bring the discussion back to the point from which it wandered.
Assume that I can give no reason for any of the instances of divination which I have mentioned and that I can do no more than show that they did occur, is that not a sufficient answer to Epicurus and to Carneades?
And what does it matter if, as between artificial and natural divination, the explanation of the former is easy and of the latter is somewhat hard?
For the results of those artificial means of divination, by means of entrails, lightnings, portents, and astrology, have been the subject of observation for a long period of time.
But in every field of inquiry great length of time employed in continued observation begets an extraordinary fund of knowledge, which may be acquired even without the intervention or inspiration of the gods, since repeated observation makes it clear what effect follows any given cause, and what sign precedes any given event.
"The second division of divination, as I said before, is the natural; and it, according to the exact teaching of physics, must be ascribed to divine Nature, from which, as the wisest philosophers maintain, our souls have been drawn and poured forth.
And since the universe is wholly filled with the Eternal Intelligence and the Divine Mind, it must be that human souls are influenced by their contact with divine souls.
But when men are awake their souls, as a rule, are subject to the demands of everyday life and are withdrawn from divine association because they are hampered by the chains of the flesh.
"However, there is a certain class of men, though small in number, who withdraw themselves from carnal influences and are wholly possessed by an ardent concern for the contemplation of things divine.
Some of these men make predictions, not as the result of direct heavenly inspiration, but by the use of their own reason.
For example, by means of natural law, they foretell certain events, such as a flood, or the future destruction of heaven and earth by fire Others, who are engaged in public life, like Solon of Athens, as history describes him, discover the rise of tyranny long in advance.
Such men we may call 'foresighted' that is, 'able to foresee the future'; but we can no more apply the term 'divine' to them than we can apply it to Thales of Miletus, who, as the story goes, in order to confound his critics and thereby show that even a philosopher, if he sees fit, can make money, bought up the entire olive crop in the district of Miletus before it had begun to bloom.
Perhaps he had observed, from some special knowledge he had on the subject, that the crop would be abundant.
And, by the way, he is said to have been the first man to predict the solar eclipse which took place in the reign of Astyages.
"There are many things foreseen by physicians, pilots, and also by farmers, but I do not call the predictions of any of them divination.
I do not even call that a case of divination when Anaximander, the natural philosopher, warned the Spartans to leave the city and their homes and to sleep in the fields under arms, because an earthquake was at hand.
Then the whole city fell down in ruins and the extremity of Mount Taygetus was torn away like the stern of a ship in a storm.
Not even Pherecydes, the famous teacher of Pythagoras, will be considered a prophet rather than a natural philosopher, because he predicted an earthquake from the appearance of some water drawn from an unfailing well.
"In fact, the human soul never divines naturally, except when it is so unrestrained and free that it has absolutely no association with the body, as happens in the case of frenzy and of dreams.
Hence both these kinds of divination have been sanctioned by Dicaearchus and also, as I said, by our friend Cratippus.
Let us grant that these two methods (because they originate in nature) take the highest rank in divination; but we will not concede that they are the only kind.
But if, on the other hand, Dicaearchus and Cratippus believe that there is nothing in observation, they hold a doctrine destructive of the foundation on which many things in everyday life depend.
However, since these men make us some concession and that not a small one in granting us divination by frenzy and dreams, I see no cause for any great war with them, especially in view of the fact that there are some philosophers who do not accept any sort of divination whatever.
"Those then, whose souls, spurning their bodies, take wings and fly abroad inflamed and aroused by a sort of passion these men, I say, certainly see the things which they foretell in their prophecies.
Such souls do not cling to the body and are kindled by many different influences.
For example, some are aroused by certain vocal tones, as by Phrygian songs, many by groves and forests, and many others by rivers and seas.
I believe, too, that there were certain subterranean vapours which had the effect of inspiring persons to utter oracles.
In all these cases the frenzied soul sees the future long in advance, as Cassandra did in the following instance:
Alas! behold!
some mortal will decide A famous case between three goddesses:
Because of that decision there will come A Spartan woman, but a Fury too.
It is in this state of exaltation that many predictions have been made, not only in prose but also
In verse which once the fauns and bards did sing.
Likewise Marcius and Publicius, according to tradition, made their prophecies in verse, and the cryptic utterances of Apollo were expressed in the same form.
"Such is the rationale of prophecy by means of frenzy, and that of dreams is not much unlike it.
For the revelations made to seers when awake are made to us in sleep.
While we sleep and the body lies as if dead, the soul is at its best, because it is then freed from the influence of the physical senses and from the worldly cares that weigh it down.
And since the soul has lived from all eternity and has had converse with numberless other souls, it sees everything that exists in nature, provided that moderation and restraint have been used in eating and in drinking, so that the soul is in a condition to watch while the body sleeps.
Such is the explanation of divination by dreams.
"At this point it is pertinent to mention Antiphon's well-known theory of the interpretation of dreams.
He has the same view as to the interpretation of oracles and of frenzied utterances; for they all have their interpreters, just as poets have their commentators.
Now it is clear that divine nature would have done a vain thing if she had merely created iron, copper, silver, and gold and had not shown us how to reach the veins in which those metals lie; the gift of field crops and orchard fruits would have been useless to the human race without a knowledge of how to cultivate them and prepare them for food; and building material would be of no service without the carpenter's art to convert it into lumber.
So it is with everything that the gods have given for the advantage of mankind, there has been joined some art whereby that advantage may be turned to account.
The same is true of dreams, prophecies, and oracles: since many of them were obscure and doubtful, resort was had to the skill of professional interpreters.
"Now there is a great problem as to how prophets and dreamers can see things, which, at the time, have no actual existence anywhere.
But that question would be solved quite readily if we were to investigate certain other questions which demand consideration first.
For the theory in regard to the nature of the gods, so clearly developed in the second book of your work on that subject, includes this whole question.
If we maintain that theory we shall establish the very point which I am trying to make: namely, 'that there are gods; that they rule the universe by their foresight; and that they direct the affairs of men not merely of men in the mass, but of each individual.'
If we succeed in holding that position and for my part I think it impregnable then surely it must follow that the gods give to men signs of coming events.
"But it seems necessary to settle the principle on which these signs depend.
For, according to the Stoic doctrine, the gods are not directly responsible for every fissure in the liver or for every song of a bird; since, manifestly, that would not be seemly or proper in a god and furthermore is impossible.
But, in the beginning, the universe was so created that certain results would be preceded by certain signs, which are given sometimes by entrails and by birds, sometimes by lightnings, by portents, and by stars, sometimes by dreams, and sometimes by utterances of persons in a frenzy.
And these signs do not often deceive the persons who observe them properly.
If prophecies, based on erroneous deductions and interpretations, turn out to be false, the fault is not chargeable to the signs but to the lack of skill in the interpreters.
"Assuming the proposition to be conceded that there is a divine power which pervades the lives of men, it is not hard to understand the principle directing those premonitory signs which we see come to pass.
For it may be that the choice of a sacrificial victim is guided by an intelligent force, which is diffused throughout the universe; or, it may be that at the moment when the sacrifice is offered, a change in the vitals occurs and something is added or taken away; for many things are added to, changed, or diminished in an instant of time.
Conclusive proof of this fact, sufficient to put it beyond the possibility of doubt, is afforded by incidents which happened just before Caesar's death.
While he was offering sacrifices on the day when he sat for the first time on a golden throne and first appeared in public in a purple robe, no heart was found in the vitals of the votive ox.
Now do you think it possible for any animal that has blood to exist without a heart?
Caesar was unmoved by this occurrence, even though Spurinna warned him to beware lest thought and life should fail him both of which, he said, proceeded from the heart.
On the following day there was no head to the liver of the sacrifice.
These portents were sent by the immortal gods to Caesar that he might foresee his death, not that he might prevent it.
Therefore, when those organs, without which the victim could not have lived, are found wanting in the vitals, we should understand that the absent organs disappeared at the very moment of immolation.
"The Divine Will accomplishes like results in the case of birds, and causes those known as alites, which give omens by their flight, to fly hither and thither and disappear now here and now there, and causes those known as oscines, which give omens by their cries, to sing now on the left and now on the right.
For if every animal moves its body forward, sideways, or backward at will, it bends, twists, extends, and contracts its members as it pleases, and performs these various motions almost mechanically; how much easier it is for such results to be accomplished by a god, whose divine will all things obey!
The same power sends us signs, of which history has preserved numerous examples.
We find the following ones recorded: when just before sunrise the moon was eclipsed in the sign of Leo, this indicated that Darius and the Persians would be overcome in battle by the Macedonians under Alexander, and that Darius would die.
Again, when a girl was born with two heads, this foretold sedition among the people and seduction and adultery in the home.
When a woman dreamed that she had been delivered of a lion, this signified that the country in which she had the dream would be conquered by foreign nations.
"Another instance of a similiar kind is related by Herodotus: Croesus's son, when an infant, spoke, and this prodigy foretold the utter overthrow of his father's family and kingdom.
What history has failed to record the fact that while Servius Tullius slept his head burst into flame?
Therefore, just as a man has clear and trustworthy dreams, provided he goes to sleep, not only with his mind prepared by noble thoughts, but also with every precaution taken to induce repose; so, too, he, when awake, is better prepared to interpret truly the messages of entrails, stars, birds, and all other signs, provided his soul is pure and undefiled.
"It is this purity of soul, no doubt, that explains that famous utterance which history attributes to Socrates and which his disciples in their books often represent him as repeating:
'There is some divine influence' , he called it 'which I always obey, though it never urges me on, but often holds me back.'
And it was the same Socrates and what better authority can we quote who was consulted by Xenophon as to whether he should join Cyrus.
Socrates, after stating what seemed to him the best thing to do, remarked: ' But my opinion is only that of a man.
In matters of doubt and perplexity I advise that Apollo's oracle be consulted.'
This oracle was always consulted by the Athenians in regard to the more serious public questions.
"It is also related of Socrates that one day he saw his friend Crito with a bandage on his eye.
'What's the matter, Crito?' he inquired.
'As I was walking in the country the branch of a tree, which had been bent, was released and struck me in the eye.'
' Of course,' said Socrates, ' for, after I had had divine warning, as usual, and tried to call you back, you did not heed.'
It is also related of him that after the unfortunate battle was fought at Delium under command of Laches, he was fleeing in company with his commander, when they came to a place where three roads met.
Upon his refusal to take the road that the others had chosen he was asked the reason and replied: 'The god prevents me.'
Those who fled by the other road fell in with the enemy's cavalry.
Antipater has gathered a mass of remarkable premonitions received by Socrates, but I shall pass them by, for you know them and it is useless for me to recount them.
However, the following utterance of that philosopher, made after he had been wickedly condemned to death, is a noble one I might almost call it' divine ': 'I am very content to die,' he said; 'for neither when I left my home nor when I mounted the platform to plead my cause, did the god give any sign, and this he always does when some evil threatens me.
"And so my opinion is that the power of divination exists, notwithstanding the fact that those who prophesy by means of art and conjecture are oftentimes mistaken.
I believe that, just as men may make mistakes in other callings, so they may in this.
It may happen that a sign of doubtful meaning is assumed to be certain or, possibly, either a sign was itself unobserved or one that annulled an observed sign may have gone unnoticed.
But, in order to establish the proposition for which I contend it is enough for me to find, not many, but even a few instances of divinely inspired prevision and prophecy.
Nay, if even one such instance is found and the agreement between the prediction and the thing predicted is so close as to exclude every semblance of chance or of accident, I should not hesitate to say in such a case, that divination undoubtedly exists and that everybody should admit its existence.
"Wherefore, it seems to me that we must do as Posidonius does and trace the vital principle of divination in its entirety to three sources: first, to God, whose connexion with the subject has been sufficiently discussed; secondly to Fate; and lastly, to Nature.
Reason compels us to admit that all things happen by Fate.
That is an immortal truth having its source in all eternity.
Therefore nothing has happened which was not bound to happen, and, likewise, nothing is going to happen which will not find in nature every efficient cause of its happening.
Consequently, we know that Fate is that which is called, not ignorantly, but scientifically, 'the eternal cause of things, the wherefore of things past, of things present, and of things to come.'
Hence it is that it may be known by observation what effect will in most instances follow any cause, even if it is not known in all; for it would be too much to say that it is known in every case.
And it is probable that these causes of coming events are perceived by those who see them during frenzy or in sleep.
"Moreover, since, as will be shown elsewhere, all things happen by Fate, if there were a man whose soul could discern the links that join each cause with every other cause, then surely he would never be mistaken in any prediction he might make.
For he who knows the causes of future events necessarily knows what every future event will be.
But since such knowledge is possible only to a god, it is left to man to presage the future by means of certain signs which indicate what will follow them.
Things which are to be do not suddenly spring into existence, but the evolution of time is like the unwinding of a cable: it creates nothing new and only unfolds each event in its order.
This connexion between cause and effect is obvious to two classes of diviners: those who are endowed with natural divination and those who know the course of events by the observation of signs.
They may not discern the causes themselves, yet they do discern the signs and tokens of those causes.
The careful study and recollection of those signs, aided by the records of former times, has evolved that sort of divination, known as artificial, which is divination by means of entrails, lightnings, portents, and celestial phenomena.
"Therefore it is not strange that diviners have a presentiment of things that exist nowhere in the material world: for all things ' are,' though, from the standpoint of' time,' they are not present.
As in seeds there inheres the germ of those things which the seeds produce, so in causes are stored the future events whose coming is foreseen by reason or conjecture, or is discerned by the soul when inspired by frenzy, or when it is set free by sleep.
Persons familiar with the rising, setting, and revolutions of the sun, moon, and other celestial bodies, can tell long in advance where any one of these bodies will be at a given time.
And the same thing may be said of men who, for a long period of time, have studied and noted the course of facts and the connexion of events, for they always know what the future will be; or, if that is putting it too strongly, they know in a majority of cases;
or, if that will not be conceded either, then, surely, they sometimes know what the future will be.
These and a few other arguments of the same kind for the existence of divination are derived from Fate.
"Moreover, divination finds another and a positive support in nature, which teaches us how great is the power of the soul when it is divorced from the bodily senses, as it is especially in sleep, ' and in times of frenzy or inspiration.
For, as the souls of the gods, without the intervention of eyes or ears or tongue, understand each other and what each one thinks (hence men, even when they offer silent prayers and vows, have no doubt that the gods understand them), so the souls of men, when released by sleep from bodily chains, or when stirred by inspiration and delivered up to their own impulses, see things that they cannot see when they are mingled with the body.
And while it is difficult, perhaps, to apply this principle of nature to explain that kind of divination which we call artificial, yet Posidonius, who digs into the question as deep as one can, thinks that nature gives certain signs of future events.
Thus Heraclides of Pontus records that it is the custom of the people of Ceos, once each year, to make a careful observation of the rising of the Dog-star and from such observation to conjecture whether the ensuing year will be healthy or pestilential.
For if the star rises dim and, as it were enveloped in a fog, this indicates a thick and heavy atmosphere, which will give off very unwholesome vapours; but if the star appears clear and brilliant, this is a sign that the atmosphere is light and pure and, as a consequence, will be conducive to good health.
"Again, Democritus expresses the opinion that the ancients acted wisely in providing for the inspection of the entrails of sacrifices; because, as he thinks, the colour and general condition of the entrails are prophetic sometimes of health and sometimes of sickness and sometimes also of whether the fields will be barren or productive.
Now, if it is known by observation and experience that these means of divination have their source in nature, it must be that the observations made and records kept for a long period of time have added much to our knowledge of this subject.
Hence, that natural philosopher introduced by Pacuvius into his play of Chryses, seems to show very scanty apprehension of the laws of nature when he speaks as follows:
The men who know the speech of birds and more Do learn from other livers than their own 'Twere best to hear, I think, and not to heed.
I do not know why this poet makes such a statement when only a few lines further on he says clearly enough:
Whate'er the power may be, it animates, Creates, gives form, increase, and nourishment To everything;
of everything the sire, It takes all things unto itself and hides Within its breast;
and as from it all things Arise, likewise to it all things return.
Since all things have one and the same and that a common home, and since the human soul has always been and will always be, why, then, should it not be able to understand what effect will follow any cause, and what sign will precede any event?
This, said Quintus, "is all that I had to say on divination."
I will assert, however, in conclusion, that I do not recognize fortune-tellers, or those who prophesy for money, or necromancers, or mediums, whom your friend Appius makes it a practice to consult.
For Marsian augurs, village mountebanks, Astrologers who haunt the circus grounds, Or Isis-seers, or dream interpreters: for they are not diviners either by knowledge or skill, But superstitious bards, soothsaying quacks, Averse to work, or mad, or ruled by want, Directing others how to go, and yet What road to take they do not know themselves;
From those to whom they promise wealth they beg A coin.
From what they promised let them take Their coin as toll and pass the balance on.
Such are the words of Ennius who only a few lines further back expresses the view that there are gods and yet says that the gods do not care what human beings do.
But for my part, believing as I do that the gods do care for man, and that they advise and often forewarn him, I approve of divination which is not trivial and is free from falsehood and trickery."
After serious and long continued reflection as to how I might do good to as many people as possible and thereby prevent any interruption of my service to the State, no better plan occurred to me than to conduct my fellow-citizens in the ways of the noblest learning and this, I believe, I have already accomplished through my numerous books.
For example, in my work entitled Hortensius, I appealed as earnestly as I could for the study of philosophy.
And in my Academics, in four volumes, I set forth the philosophic system which I thought least arrogant, and at the same time most consistent and refined.
And, since the foundation of philosophy rests on the distinction between good and evil, I exhaustively treated that subject in five volumes and in such a way that the conflicting views of the different philosophers might be known.
Next, and in the same number of volumes, came the Tusculan Disputations, which made plain the means most essential to a happy life.
For the first volume treats of indifference to death, the second of enduring pain, the third of the alleviation of sorrow, the fourth of other spiritual disturbances; and the fifth embraces a topic which sheds the brightest light on the entire field of philosophy since it teaches that virtue is sufficient of itself for the attainment of happiness.
After publishing the works mentioned I finished three volumes On the Nature of the Gods, which contain a discussion of every question under that head.
With a view of simplifying and extending the latter treatise I started to write the present volume On Divination, to which I plan to add a work on Fate; when that is done every phase of this particular branch of philosophy will be sufficiently discussed.
To this list of works must be added the six volumes which I wrote while holding the helm of state, entitled On the Republic a weighty subject, appropriate for philosophic discussion, and one which has been most elaborately treated by Plato, Aristotle, Theophrastus, and the entire Peripatetic school.
What need is there to say anything of my treatise On Consolation?
For it is the source of very great comfort to me and will, I think, be of much help to others.
I have also recently thrown in that book On Old Age, which I sent my friend Atticus; and, since it is by philosophy that a man is made virtuous and strong, my Cato is especially worthy of a place among the foregoing books.
Inasmuch as Aristotle and Theophrastus, too, both of whom were celebrated for their keenness of intellect and particularly for their copiousness of speech, have joined rhetoric with philosophy, it seems proper also to put my rhetorical books in the same category;
hence we shall include the three volumes On Oratory, the fourth entitled Brutus, and the fifth called The Orator.
I have named the philosophic works so far written: to the completion of the remaining books of this series I was hastening with so much ardour that if some most grievous cause had not intervened there would not now be any phase of philosophy which I had failed to elucidate and make easily accessible in the Latin tongue.
For what greater or better service can I render to the common wealth than to instruct and train the youth, especially in view of the fact that our young men have gone so far astray because of the present moral laxity that the utmost effort will be needed to hold them in check and direct them in the right way?
Of course, I have no assurance it could not even be expected that they will all turn to these studies.
Would that a few may!
Though few, their activity may yet have a wide influence in the state.
In fact, I am receiving some reward for my labour even from men advanced in years; for they are finding comfort in my books, and by their ardour in reading are raising my eagerness for writing to a higher pitch every day.
Their number, too, I learn, is far greater than I had expected.
Furthermore, it would redound to the fame and glory of the Roman people to be made independent of Greek writers in the study of philosophy,
and this result I shall certainly bring about if my present plans are accomplished.
The cause of my becoming an expounder of philosophy sprang from the grave condition of the State during the period of the Civil War, when, being unable to protect the Republic, as had been my custom, and finding it impossible to remain inactive, I could find nothing else that I preferred to do that was worthy of me.
Therefore my countrymen will pardon me rather they will thank me because, when the State was in the power of one man, I refused to hide myself, to quit my place, or to be cast down; I did not bear myself like one enraged at the man or at the times; and, further, I neither so fawned upon nor admired another's fortune as to repent me of my own.
For one thing in particular I had learned from Plato and from philosophy, that certain revolutions in government are to be expected; so that states are now under a monarchy, now under a democracy, and now under a tyranny.
When the last-named fate had befallen my country, and I had been debarred from my former activities, I began to cultivate anew these present studies that by their means, rather than by any other, I might relieve my mind of its worries and at the same time serve my fellow-countrymen as best I could under the circumstances.
Accordingly, it was in my books that I made my senatorial speeches and my forensic harangues; for I thought that I had permanently exchanged politics for philosophy.
Now, however, since I have begun to be consulted again about public affairs, my time must be devoted to the State, or, rather, my undivided thought and care must be fixed upon it; and only so much time can be given to philosophy as will not be needed in the discharge of my duty to the commonwealth.
But more of this at another time; now let us return to the discussion with which we started.
After my brother Quintus had delivered his views on divination, as set out in the preceding volume, and we had walked as much as we wished, we took our seats in the library in my "Lyceum," and I remarked:
"Really, my dear Quintus, you have defended the Stoic doctrine with accuracy and like a Stoic.
But the thing that delights me most is the fact that you illustrated your argument with many incidents taken from Roman sources-incidents, too, of a distinguished and noble type.
I must now reply to what you said, but I must do so with great diffidence and with many misgivings, and in such a way as to affirm nothing and question everything.
For if I should assume anything that I said to be certain I should myself be playing the diviner while saying that no such thing as divination exists!
"I am impressed with the force of the questions with which Carneades used to begin his discussions: ' What are the things within the scope of divination?
Are they things that are perceived by the senses?
But those are things that we see, hear, taste, smell, and touch.
Is there, then, in such objects some quality that we can better perceive with the aid of prophecy and inspiration than we can with the aid of the senses alone?
And is there any diviner, anywhere, who, if blind, like Tiresias, could tell the difference between white and black? Or, who, if deaf, could distinguish between different voices and different tones?
Now you must admit that divination is not applicable in any case where knowledge is gained through the senses.
"Nor is there any need of divination even in matters within the domain of science and of art.
For, when people are sick, we, as a general rule, do not summon a prophet or a seer, but we call in a physician.
Again, persons who want to learn to play on the harp or on the flute take lessons, not from a soothsayer, but from a musician.
The same rule applies in literature and in other departments of learning.
And do you really believe that those who are credited with powers of divining, can, for that reason, tell whether the sun is larger than the earth, and whether it is as big as it seems to be?
Or whether the moon shines by its own light or by that of the sun?
Or do you think that they understand the motions of the sun and moon and of the five stars, which are called' planets '?
Your reputed diviners do not claim that they can answer any of these questions; nor will they profess to tell whether geometrical figures are correctly drawn or not, for that is the business of mathematicians, not of seers.
"Now let us consider matters within the purview of philosophy: When the question is as to what is morally right, or morally wrong, or as to what is neither the one nor the other, do we usually have our doubts resolved by diviners? In fact, do we often consult them in such a case?
Certainly not, for problems of this kind belong to philosophers.
Again, where the question is one of duty: who ever consults a soothsayer as to how he should demean himself towards his parents, his brothers, or his friends? or as to how he should use his wealth, his office, or his power?
Such matters are usually referred to sages, not to diviners.
"Furthermore, can any of the questions of dialectic or of physics be solved by divination?
For example, is there one world, or are there many worlds?
What are the primary elements from which all things are derived?
Such problems belong to the science of physics.
Again, suppose one should wish to know how to resolve the 'liar' fallacy, which the Greeks call  or how to meet the 'heap' fallacy, known in Greek as sorites (which, if a Latin equivalent were needed, could be represented by the word acervalis, but none is needed; for, just as the word 'philosophy' and many other words are of Greek origin and are in general use as Latin words, so it is with sorites),
in both these cases the logician, and not the diviner, would speak.
"Assume, next, that the inquiry is as to the best form of government, or as to what laws or what customs are beneficial and what are harmful, will you call soothsayers out of Etruria to settle the question, or will you accept the decision of men of eminence chosen for their knowledge of statecraft?
But if there is no place for divination in things perceived by the senses, or in those included among the arts, or in those discussed by philosophers, or in those which have to do with government, I see absolutely no need for it anywhere.
For either it ought to be of use in every case, or, at least, some department in which it may be employed should be found.
But divination is not of use in every case, as my reasoning has shown; nor can any field or subject matter be found over which it may exercise control.
Therefore I am inclined to think that there is no such thing as divination.
There is a much-quoted Greek verse to this effect:
The best diviner I maintain to be The man who guesses or conjectures best.
Now do you think that a prophet will 'conjecture' better whether a storm is at hand than a pilot?
or that he will by 'conjecture' make a more accurate diagnosis than a physician, or conduct a war with more skill than a general?
"But I observed, Quintus, that you prudently withdrew divination from conjectures based upon skill and experience in public affairs, from those drawn from the use of the senses and from those made by persons in their own callings.
I observed, also, that you defined divination to be 'the foreknowledge and foretelling of things which happen by chance.'
In the first place, that is a contradiction of what you have admitted.
For the foreknowledge possessed by a physician, a pilot, and a general is of 'things which happen by chance.'
Then can any soothsayer, augur, prophet, or dreamer conjecture better than a physician, a pilot, or a general that an invalid will come safely out of his sickness, or that a ship will escape from danger, or that an army will avoid an ambuscade?
"And you went on to say that even the foreknowledge of impending storms and rains by means of certain signs was not divination, and, in that connexion, you quoted a number of verses from my translation of Aratus.
Yet such coincidences' happen by chance,' for though they happen frequently they do not happen always.
What, then, is this thing you call divination this 'foreknowledge of things that happen by chance ' and where is it employed?
You think that 'whatever can be foreknown by means of science, reason, experience, or conjecture is to be referred, not to diviners, but to experts.'
It follows, therefore, that divination of' things that happen by chance' is possible only of things which cannot be foreseen by means of skill or wisdom.
Hence, if someone had declared many years in advance that the famous Marcus Marcellus, who was consul three times, would perish in a shipwreck, this, by your definition, undoubtedly would have been a case of divination, since that calamity could not have been foreseen by means of any other skill or by wisdom.
That is why you say that divination is the foreknowledge of such things as depend upon chance.
"Can there, then, be any foreknowledge of things for whose happening no reason exists?
For we do not apply the words 'chance,' 'luck,' 'accident,' or 'casualty' except to an event which has so occurred or happened that it either might not have occurred at all, or might have occurred in any other way.
How, then, is it possible to foresee and to predict an event that happens at random, as the result of blind accident, or of unstable chance?
By the use of reason the physician foresees the progress of a disease, the general anticipates the enemy's plans and the pilot forecasts the approach of bad weather.
And yet even those who base their conclusions on accurate reasoning are often mistaken: for example, when the farmer sees his olive-tree in bloom he expects also, and not unreasonably, to see it bear fruit, but occasionally he is disappointed.
If then mistakes are made by those who make no forecasts not based upon some reasonable and probable conjecture, what must we think of the conjectures of men who foretell the future by means of entrails, birds, portents, oracles, or dreams?
I am not ready yet to take up one by one the various kinds of divination and show that the cleft in the liver, the croak of a raven, the flight of an eagle, the fall of a star, the utterances of persons in a frenzy, lots, and dreams have no prophetic value whatever; I shall discuss each of them in its turn now I am discussing the subject as a whole.
"How can anything be foreseen that has no cause and no distinguishing mark of its coming?
Eclipses of the sun and also of the moon are predicted for many years in advance by men who employ mathematics in studying the courses and movements of the heavenly bodies; and the unvarying laws of nature will bring their predictions to pass.
Because of the perfectly regular movements of the moon the astronomers calculate when it will be opposite the sun and in the earth's shadow which is 'the cone of night ' and when, necessarily, it will become invisible.
For the same reason they know when the moon will be directly between the earth and the sun and thus will hide the light of the sun from our eyes.
They know in what sign each planet will be at any given time and at what time each day any constellation will rise and set.
You see the course of reasoning followed in arriving at these predictions.
"But what course of reasoning is followed by men who predict the finding of a treasure or the inheritance of an estate?
On what law of nature do such prophecies depend?
But, on the other hand, if the prophecies just mentioned and others of the same class are controlled by some natural and immutable law such as regulates the movements of the stars, pray, can we conceive of anything happening by accident, or chance?
Surely nothing is so at variance with reason and stability as chance.
Hence it seems to me that it is not in the power even of God himself to know what event is going to happen accidentally and by chance.
For if He knows, then the event is certain to happen; but if it is certain to happen, chance does not exist.
And yet chance does exist, therefore there is no foreknowledge of things that happen by chance.
"But if you deny the existence of chance and assert that the course of everything present or future has been inevitably determined from all eternity, then you must change your definition of divination, which you said was 'the foreknowledge of things that happen by chance.'
For if nothing can happen, nothing befall, nothing come to pass, except what has been determined from all eternity as bound to happen at a fixed time, how can there be such a thing as chance?
And if there is no such thing as chance, what room is there for that divination, which you termed 'a foreknowledge of things that happen by chance'?
And you were inconsistent enough, too, to say that everything that is or will be is controlled by Fate!
Why, the very word ' Fate ' is full of superstition and old women's credulity, and yet the Stoics have much to say of this Fate of yours.
A discussion on Fate is reserved for another occasion; at present I shall speak of it only in so far as it is necessary.
"Of what advantage to me is divination if everything is ruled by Fate?
On that hypothesis what the diviner predicts is bound to happen.
Hence I do not know what to make of the fact that an eagle recalled our intimate friend Deiotarus from his journey ; for if he had not turned back he must have been sleeping in the room when it was destroyed the following night, and, therefore, have been crushed in the ruins.
And yet, if Fate had willed it, he would not have escaped that calamity; and vice versa.
Hence, I repeat, what is the good of divination?
Or what is it that lots, entrails, or any other means of prophecy warn me to avoid?
For, if it was the will of Fate that the Roman fleets in the First Punic War should perish the one by shipwreck and the other at the hands of the Carthaginians they would have perished just the same even if the sacred chickens had made a tripudium solistimum in the consulship of Lucius Junius and Publius Claudius!
On the other hand, if obedience to the auspices would have prevented the destruction of the fleets, then they did not perish in accordance with Fate.
But you insist that all things happen by Fate; therefore there is no such thing as divination.
"Again, if it was the will of Fate that the Roman army should perish at Lake Trasimenus in the Second Punic War, could that result have been avoided if the consul Flaminius had obeyed the signs and the auspices which forbade his joining battle?
Assuredly not.
Therefore, either the army did not perish by the will of Fate, or, if it did (and you are certainly bound as a Stoic to say that it did), the same result would have happened even if the auspices had been obeyed; for the decrees of Fate are unchangeable.
Then what becomes of that vaunted divination of you Stoics?
For if all things happen by Fate, it does us no good to be warned to be on our guard, since that which is to happen, will happen regardless of what we do.
But if that which is to be can be turned aside, there is no such thing as Fate; so, too, there is no such thing as divination since divination deals with things that are going to happen.
But nothing is ' certain to happen' which there is some means of dealing with so as to prevent its happening.
"And further, for my part, I think that a knowledge of the future would be a disadvantage.
Consider, for example, what Priam's life would have been if he had known from youth what dire events his old age held in store for him!
But let us leave the era of myths and come to events nearer home.
In my work On Consolation I have collected instances of very grievous deaths that befell some of the most illustrious men of our commonwealth.
Passing by men of earlier day, let us take Marcus Crassus.
What advantage, pray, do you think it would have been to him, when he was at the very summit of power and wealth, to know that he was destined to perish beyond the Euphrates in shame and dishonour, after his son had been killed and his own army had been destroyed?
Or do you think that Gnaeus Pompey would have found joy in his three consulships, in his three triumphs, and in the fame of his transcendent deeds, if he had known that he would be slain in an Egyptian desert, after he had lost his army, and that following his death those grave events would occur of which I cannot speak without tears?
"Or what do we think of Caesar?
Had he foreseen that in the Senate, chosen in most part by himself, in Pompey's hall, aye, before Pompey's very statue, and in the presence of many of his own centurions, he would be put to death by most noble citizens, some of whom owed all that they had to him, and that he would fall to so low an estate that no friend no, not even a slave would approach his dead body, in what agony of soul would he have spent his life!
"Of a surety, then, ignorance of future ills is more profitable than the knowledge of them.
For, assuming that men knew the future it cannot in any wise be said certainly not by the Stoics that Pompey would not have taken up arms, that Crassus would not have crossed the Euphrates, or that Caesar would not have embarked upon the civil war.
If so, then, the deaths that befell these men were not determined by Fate.
But you will have it that everything happens by Fate; consequently, knowledge of the future would have done these men no good.
In reality it would have entirely deprived the earlier portion of their lives of enjoyment; for how could they have been happy in reflecting what their ends would be?
And so, however the Stoics turn and twist, all their shrewdness must come to naught.
For, if a thing that is going to happen, may happen in one way or another, indifferently, chance is predominant; but things that happen by chance cannot be certain.
But if it is certain what is going to befall me in reference to any matter and on every occasion, how do the soothsayers help me by saying that the greatest misfortunes await me?
"To the last point the Stoics make the rejoinder that 'every evil which is going to befall us is made lighter by means of religious rites.'
But if nothing happens except in accordance with Fate, no evil can be made lighter by means of religious rites.
Homer shows his appreciation of this fact when he represents Jupiter as complaining because he could not snatch his son Sarpedon from death when Fate forbade.
The same thought is expressed in the following verses translated from a Greek poet:
That which has been decreed by Fate to be Almighty Jove himself cannot prevent.
The whole idea of Fate in every detail is justly, as I think, the subject of derision even in Atellan farces, but in a discussion as serious as ours joking is out of place.
So then let us sum up our argument: If it is impossible to foresee things that happen by chance because they are uncertain, there is no such thing as divination; if, on the contrary, they can be foreseen because they are preordained by Fate, still there is no such thing as divination, which, by your definition, deals with 'things that happen by chance.'
But this introductory part of my discussion has been mere skirmishing with light infantry; now let me come to close quarters and see if I cannot drive in both wings of your argument.
"You divided divination into two kinds, one artificial and the other natural.
'The artificial,' you said, 'consists in part of conjecture and in part of long-continued observation; while the natural is that which the soul has seized, or, rather, has obtained, from a source outside itself that is, from God, whence all human souls have been drawn off, received, or poured out.'
Under the head of artificial divination you placed predictions made from the inspection of entrails, those made from lightnings and portents, those made by augurs, and by persons who depend entirely upon premonitory signs.
Under the same head you included practically every method of prophecy in which conjecture was employed.
Natural divination, on the other hand, according to your view, is the result 'the effusion,' as it were of mental excitement, or it is the prophetic power which the soul has during sleep while free from bodily sensation and worldly cares.
Moreover, you derived every form of divination from three sources: God, Fate, and Nature.
And although you could not give a reason for any kind of divination, still you carried on the war by marshalling an astonishing array of examples from fiction.
Of such a course I wish to say emphatically that it is not becoming in a philosopher to introduce testimony which may be either true by accident, or false and fabricated through malice.
You ought to have employed arguments and reason to show that all your propositions were true and you ought not to have resorted to so-called occurrences certainly not to such occurrences as are unworthy of belief.
"In discussing separately the various methods of divination, I shall begin with soothsaying, which, according to my deliberate judgement, should be cultivated from reasons of political expediency and in order that we may have a state religion.
But we are alone and for that reason we may, without causing ill-will, make an earnest inquiry into the truth of soothsaying certainly I can do so, since in most things my philosophy is that of doubt.
In the first place, then, if you please, let us make an inspection' of entrails!
Now can anybody be induced to believe that the things said to be predicted by means of entrails were learned by the soothsayers through 'long-continued observation'?
How long, pray, did the observations last?
How could the observations have continued for a long time?
How did the soothsayers manage to agree among themselves what part of the entrails was unfavourable, and what part favourable; or what cleft in the liver indicated danger and what promised some advantage?
Are the soothsayers of Etruria, Elis, Egypt, and of Carthage in accord on these matters?
Apart from such an agreement being impossible in fact, it is impossible even to imagine; and, moreover, we see some nations interpreting entrails in one way and some in another; hence there is no uniformity of practice.
"Surely if entrails have any prophetic force, necessarily that force either is in accord with the laws of nature, or is fashioned in some way by the will and power of the gods.
But between that divine system of nature whose great and glorious laws pervade all space and regulate all motion what possible connexion can there be with I shall not say the gall of a chicken, whose entrails, some men assert, give very clear indications of the future, but the liver, heart, and lungs of a sacrificial ox?
And what natural quality is there in the entrails which enables them to indicate the future?
"Nevertheless Democritus jests rather prettily for a natural philosopher and there is no more arrogant class when he says:
No one regards the things before his feet, But views with care the regions of the sky.
And yet Democritus gives his approval to divination by means of entrails only to the extent of believing that their condition and colour indicate whether hay and other crops will be abundant or the reverse, and he even thinks that the entrails give signs of future health or sickness.
O happy mortal!
He never failed to have his joke that is absolutely certain.
But was he so amused with petty trifles as to fail to see that his theory would be plausible only on the assumption that the entrails of all cattle changed to the same colour and condition at the same time?
But if at the same instant the liver of one ox is smooth and full and that of another is rough and shrunken, what inference can be drawn from 'the condition and colour of the entrails'?
"Equally amusing is your story about Pherecydes, who, after looking at some water just drawn from a well, foretold an earthquake.
It would be presumptuous enough, I think, for natural philosophers to attempt to explain the cause of an earthquake after it had happened; but can they actually tell, from looking at fresh water, that an earthquake is going to happen?
Such nonsense is often heard in the schools, but one does not have to believe everything one hears.
But grant that these absurdities of Democritus are true when do we ever consult entrails to learn about crops or health, \
or when have we acquired information on these partiticulars from a soothsayer after he had made an inspection of entrails?
The soothsayers warn us of dangers by fire and flood and sometimes they prophesy the inheritance, sometimes the loss, of money;
they discuss the favourable and the unfavourable cleft;
they view the head of the liver with the utmost care from every side.
If, perchance, the liver's head should be wanting they regard it as the most unpropitious sign that could have happened.
"Such signs, as I have shown before, certainly could not come within your classification of the kinds of divination 'dependent on observation.'
Therefore they are not the result of immemorial usage, but they are the inventions of art if there can be any art in the occult.
But what relationship have they with the laws of nature?
Assuming that all the works of nature are firmly bound together in a harmonious whole (which, I observe, is the view of the natural philosophers and especially of those men who maintain that the universe is a unit), what connexion can there be between the universe and the finding of a treasure?
For instance, if the entrails foretell an increase in my fortune and they do so in accordance with some law of nature, then, in the first place, there is some relationship between them and the universe, and in the second place, my financial gain is regulated by the laws of nature.
Are not the natural philosophers ashamed to utter such nonsense?
And yet a certain contact between the different parts of nature may be admitted and I concede it.
The Stoics have collected much evidence to prove it.
They claim, for example, that the livers of mice become larger in winter; that the dry pennyroyal blooms the very day of the winter solstice, and that its seed-pods become inflated and burst and the seeds enclosed therein are sent in various directions; that at times when certain strings of the lyre are struck others sound; that it is the habit of oysters and of all shell-fish to grow with the growth of the moon and to become smaller as it wanes; and that trees are considered easiest to cut down in winter and in the dark of the moon, because they are then free from sap.
"There is no need to go on and mention the seas and straits with their tides, whose ebb and flow are governed by the motion of the moon.
Innumerable instances of the same kind may be given to prove that some natural connexion does exist between objects apparently unrelated.
Concede that it does exist; it does not contravene the point I make, that no sort of a cleft in a liver is prophetic of financial gain.
What natural tie, or what 'symphony,' so to speak, or association, or what' sympathy,' as the Greeks term it, can there be between a cleft in a liver and a petty addition to my purse? Or what relationship between my miserable money-getting, on the one hand, and heaven, earth, and the laws of nature on the other?
"However, I will concede even this if you wish, though it will greatly weaken my case to admit that there is any connexion between nature and the condition of the entrails;
yet, suppose the concession made, how is it brought about that the man in search of favourable signs will find a sacrifice suited to his purpose?
I thought the question insoluble.
But what a fine solution is offered!
I am not ashamed of you I am actually astonished at your memory; but I am ashamed of Chrysippus, Antipater, and Posidonius who say exactly what you said: ' The choice of the sacrificial victim is directed by the sentient and divine power which pervades the entire universe.
"But even more absurd is that other pronouncement of theirs which you adopted:
' At the moment of sacrifice a change in the entrails takes place; something is added or something taken away; for all things are obedient to the Divine Will.'
Upon my word, no old woman is credulous enough now to believe such stuff!
Do you believe that the same bullock, if chosen by one man, will have a liver without a head, and if chosen by another will have a liver with a head?
And is it possible that this sudden going or coming of the liver's head occurs so that the entrails may adapt themselves to the situation of the person who offers the sacrifice?
Do you Stoics fail to see in choosing the victim it is almost like a throw of the dice, especially as facts prove it?
For when the entrails of the first victim have been without a head, which is the most fatal of all signs, it often happens that the sacrifice of the next victim is altogether favourable.
Pray what became of the warnings of the first set of entrails?
And how was the favour of the gods so completely and so suddenly gained?
"But, you say, 'Once, when Caesar was offering a sacrifice, there was no heart in the entrails of the sacrificial bull; and, since it would have been impossible for the victim to live without a heart, the heart must have disappeared at the moment of immolation.'
How does it happen that you understand the one fact, that the bull could not have lived without a heart and do not realize the other, that the heart could not suddenly have vanished I know not where?
As for me, possibly I do not know what vital function the heart performs; if I do I suspect that the bull's heart, as the result of a disease, became much wasted and shrunken and lost its resemblance to a heart.
But, assuming that only a little while before the heart was in the sacrificial bull, why do you think it suddenly disappeared at the very moment of immolation?
Don't you think, rather, that the bull lost his heart when he saw that Caesar in his purple robe had lost his head?
"Upon my word you Stoics surrender the very city of philosophy while defending its outworks!
For, by your insistence on the truth of soothsaying, you utterly overthrow physiology.
There is a head to the liver and a heart in the entrails, presto!
they will vanish the very second you have sprinkled them with meal and wine!
Aye, some god will snatch them away!
Some invisible power will destroy them or eat them up!
Then the creation and destruction of all things are not due to nature, and there are some things which spring from nothing or suddenly become nothing.
Was any such statement ever made by any natural philosopher?
'It is made,' you say, 'by soothsayers.'
Then do you think that soothsayers are worthier of belief than natural philosophers?
"Again, when sacrifices are offered to more than one god at the same time, how does it happen that the auspices are favourable in one case and unfavourable in another?
Is it not strange fickleness in the gods to threaten disaster in the first set of entrails and to promise a blessing in the next?
Or is there such discord among the gods often even among those who are nearest of kin that the entrails of the sacrifice you offer to Apollo, for example, are favourable and of those you offer at the same time to Diana are unfavourable?
When victims for the sacrifice are brought up at haphazard it is perfectly clear that the character of entrails that you will receive will depend on the victim chance may bring.
Oh! but someone will say, 'The choice itself is a matter of divine guidance, just as in the case of lots the drawing is directed by the gods!'
I shall speak of lots presently; although you really do not strengthen the cause of sacrifices by comparing them to lots; but you do weaken the cause of lots by comparing them with sacrifices.
When I send a slave to Aequimaelium to bring me a lamb for a sacrifice and he brings me the lamb which has entrails suited to the exigencies of my particular case, it was not chance, I suppose, but a god that led the slave to that particular lamb!
If you say that in this case too chance is, as it were, a sort of lot in accordance with the divine will, then I am sorry that our Stoic friends have given the Epicureans so great an opportunity for laughter, for you know how much fun they make of statements like that.
"And they can laugh with the better grace because Epicurus, to make the gods ridiculous, represents them as transparent, with the winds blowing through them, and living between two worlds (as if between our two groves ) from fear of the downfall.
He further says that the gods have limbs just as we have, but make no use of them.
Hence, while he takes a roundabout way to destroy the gods, he does not hesitate to take a short road to destroy divination.
At any rate Epicurus is consistent, but the Stoics are not;
for his god, who has no concern for himself or for anybody else, cannot impart divination to men.
And neither can your Stoic god impart divination, although he rules the world and plans for the good of mankind.
Why then do you Stoics involve yourselves in these sophistries, which you can never explain?
Members of your school, when they are more hurried than usual, generally give us this syllogism: 'If there are gods, there is divination; but there are gods, therefore there is divination.'
A more logical one would be this: 'There is no divination, therefore there are no gods.'
Observe how rashly they commit themselves to the proposition, 'if there is no divination, there are no gods.'
I say 'rashly,' for it is evident that divination has been destroyed and yet we must hold on to the gods.
"In demolishing divination by means of entrails we have utterly demolished the soothsayer's art;
for the same fate awaits divination by means of lightnings and portents.
According to your view, long-continued observation is employed in the case of lightnings, and reason and conjecture are generally employed in the case of portents.
But what is it that has been observed in the case of lightnings?
The Etruscans divided the sky into sixteen parts.
Of course it was easy enough for them to double the four parts into which we divide it and then double that total and tell from which one of those divisions a bolt of lightning had come.
In the first place, what difference does its location make?
and, in the second place, what does it foretell?
It is perfectly evident that, out of the wonder and fear excited in primitive man by lightning and thunderbolts, sprang his belief that those phenomena were caused by omnipotent Jove.
And so we find it recorded in our augural annals: 'When Jove thunders or lightens it is impious to hold an election.'
This was ordained, perhaps, from reasons of political expediency; for our ancestors wished to have some excuse for not holding elections sometimes.
And so lightning is an unfavourable sign only in case of an election; in all other cases we consider it the best of auspices, if it appears on the left side.
But I shall speak of auspices in another connexion now I am going to discuss lightnings.
"There is, then, no statement less worthy of a natural philosopher than that anything can be foretold with a certainty by uncertain signs.
Of course I do not think you are credulous enough to believe that Jove's thunderbolt was made on Mount Aetna by the Cyclopes.
For if he had but one bolt his hurling it so often would be strange
Nor would he be able to give men so many advices by thunderbolts as to what they should or should not do.
But the Stoics account for the thunderbolt thus: 'When the cold exhalations from the earth begin to circulate they become winds; when these winds enter a cloud they begin to break-up and scatter its thinnest portions;
if they do this very rapidly and with great violence, thunder and lightning are thereby produced.
Again, when clouds collide their heat is forcibly driven out and the thunderbolt is the result.'
Realizing, then, that these phenomena are due to natural causes, and happen without regularity and at no certain time, shall we look to them for signs of future events?
It is passing strange, if Jupiter warns us by means of thunderbolts, that he sends so many to no purpose!
What, for example, is his object in hurling them into the middle of the sea?
or, as he so often does, on to the tops of lofty mountains?
Why, pray, does he waste them in solitary deserts?
And why does he fling them on the shores of peoples who do not take any notice of them?
"Oh! but you say, 'the head was found in the Tiber.'
As if I contended that your soothsayers were devoid of art!
My contention is that there is no divination.
By dividing the heavens in the manner already indicated and by noting what happened in each division the soothsayers learn whence the thunderbolt comes and whither it goes, but no method can show that the thunderbolt has any prophetic value.
However, you array those verses of mine against me:
For high-thundering Jove, as he stood on starry Olympus, Hurtled his blows at the temples and monuments raised in his honour, And on the Capitol's site unloosed the bolts of his lightning.
'Then,' the poem goes on to say, 'the statue of Natta, the images of the gods and the piece representing Romulus and Remus, with their wolf-nurse, were struck by a thunderbolt and fell to the ground.
The prophecies made by the soothsayers from these events were fulfilled to the letter.'
Besides, you quote me as authority for the remarkable fact that, at the very time when proof of the conspiracy was being presented to the Senate, the statue of Jupiter, which had been contracted for two years before, was being erected on the Capitol.
"'Will you then ' for thus you pleaded with me ' will you then persuade yourself to take sides against me in this discussion, in the face of your own writings and of your own practice?
' You are my brother and on that account I shrink from recrimination.
But what, pray, is causing you distress in this matter?
Is it the nature of the subject? Or is it my insistence on finding out the truth?
And so I waive your charge of my inconsistency I am asking you for an explanation of the entire subject of soothsaying.
But you betook yourself to a strange place of refuge.
You knew that you would be in straits when I asked your reason for each kind of divination, and, hence, you had much to say to this effect: 'Since I see what divination does I do not ask the reason or the cause why it does it.
The question is, what does it do? not, why does it do it?
' As if I would grant either that divination accomplished anything, or that it was permissible for a philosopher not to ask why anything happened!
It was in that same connexion that you brought forth my Prognostics and some samples of herbs the scammony and aristolochia root saying that you could see their virtue and effect but did not know the cause.
"But your illustrations are not pertinent at all.
For example, the causes of meteorological phenomena have been investigated by Boethus the Stoic, whom you mentioned, and by our friend Posidonius;
and even if the causes are not discovered by them, yet the phenomena themselves are capable of observation and study.
But what opportunity was there for long-continued observation in the case where Natta's statue and the brazen tablets of laws were struck by lightning?
'The Nattas,' you say, 'were of the Pinarian gens and of noble birth, therefore danger was to be expected from the nobility.'
So clever of Jupiter to devise such a means to warn us of danger!
'The statue of the infant Romulus,' you observe, ' was struck by a thunderbolt; hence danger was thereby predicted to the city which he founded.'
How wise of Jupiter to use signs in conveying information to us!
Again, you say, 'Jupiter's statue was being set up at the very time the conspiracy was being exposed.'
You, of course, prefer to attribute this coincidence to a divine decree rather than to chance.
The man to whom Cotta and Torquatus let the contract for the statue did not, I presume, delay the completion of his work either from lack of energy or from lack of funds, but his hand was stayed till the appointed hour by the immortal gods!
"I am not a hopeless sceptic on the subject of such warnings really being sent by the gods;
however, I do not know that they are and I want to learn the actual facts from you.
Again, when certain other events occurred as they had been foretold by diviners and I attributed the coincidence to chance, you talked a long time about chance.
You said, for example, 'For the Venus-throw to result from one cast of the four dice might be due to chance; but if a hundred Venus-throws resulted from one hundred casts this could not be due to chance.'
In the first place I do not know why it could not; but I do not contest the point, for you are full of the same sort of examples
you had that about the scattering of the paints and that one about the hog's snout, and you had very many other examples besides.
You also mentioned that myth from Carneades about the head of Pan as if the likeness could not have been the result of chance!
and as if every block of marble did not necessarily have within it heads worthy of Praxiteles!
For his masterpieces were made by chipping away the marble, not by adding anything to it; and when, after much chipping, the lineaments of a face were reached, one then realized that the work now polished and complete had always been inside the block.
Therefore, it is possible that some such figure as Carneades described did spontaneously appear in the Chian quarries.
On the other hand, the story may be untrue.
Again, you have oftennoticed clouds take the form of a lion or a hippocentaur; Therefore it is possible for chance to imitate reality, and this you just now denied.
"But since entrails and lightnings have been sufficiently discussed it remains for us to examine portents, if we are to treat soothsaying in its entirety.
You spoke of a mule bearing a colt.
Such an event excites wonder because it seldom occurs; but if it had been impossible it would not have occurred.
And it may be urged with effect against all portents that the impossible never has happened and that the possible need not excite any wonder.
Now, in case of some new occurrence, ignorance of its cause is what excites our wonder; whereas, the same ignorance as to things of frequent occurrence does not.
For the man who marvels that a mule has foaled does not understand how a mare foals and is ignorant of animal parturition in general.
What he sees frequently causes him no astonishment even though he does not know how it happened.
If something happens which he never saw before he considers it a portent.
Then, which is the portent the mule's conception or its parturition?
The conception, it may be, is contrary to the usual course of nature, but the parturition follows as a necessary sequel of conception.
"It seems useless to say more about soothsaying.
However, let us examine its origin and thus we shall very readily determine its value.
The tradition is that, once upon a time, in the district of Tarquinii, while a field was being ploughed, the ploughshare went deeper than usual and a certain Tages suddenly sprang forth and spoke to the ploughman.
Now this Tages, according to the Etruscan annals, is said to have had the appearance of a boy, but the wisdom of a seer.
Astounded and much frightened at the sight, the rustic raised a great cry; a crowd gathered and, indeed, in a short time, the whole of Etruria assembled at the spot.
Tages then spoke at length to his numerous hearers, who received with eagerness all that he had to say, and committed it to writing.
His whole address was devoted to an exposition of the science of soothsaying.
Later, as new facts were learned and tested by reference to the principles imparted by Tages, they were added to the original fund of knowledge.
"This is the story as we get it from the Etruscans themselves and as their records preserve it, and this, in their own opinion, is the origin of their art.
Now do we need a Carneades or an Epicurus to refute such nonsense?
Who in the world is stupid enough to believe that anybody ever ploughed up which shall I say a god or a man?
If a god, why did he, contrary to his nature, hide himself in the ground to be uncovered and brought to the light of day by a plough?
Could not this so-called god have delivered this art to mankind from a more exalted station?
But if this fellow Tages was a man, pray, how could he have lived covered with earth?
Finally, where had he himself learned the things he taught others?
But really in spending so much time in refuting such stuff I am more absurd than the very people who believe it.
"But indeed, that was quite a clever remark which Cato made many years ago: 'I wonder,' said he, 'that a soothsayer doesn't laugh when he sees another soothsayer.'
For how many things predicted by them really come true?
If any do come true, then what reason can be advanced why the agreement of the event with the prophecy was not due to chance?
While Hannibal was in exile at the court of King Prusias he advised the king to go to war, but the king replied, 'I do not dare, because the entrails forbid.'
' And do you,' said Hannibal, 'put more reliance in pieces of ox-meat than you do in a veteran commander?'
Again, when Caesar himself was warned by a most eminent soothsayer not to cross over to Africa before the winter solstice, did he not cross?
If he had not done so all the forces opposed to him would have effected a junction.
Why need I give instances and, in fact, I could give countless ones where the prophecies of soothsayers either were without result or the issue was directly the reverse of the prophecy?
Ye gods, how many times they were mistaken in the late civil war!
What oracular messages the soothsayers sent from Rome to our Pompeian party then in Greece!
What assurances they gave to Pompey!
For he placed great reliance in divination by means of entrails and portents.
I have no wish to call these instances to mind, and indeed it is unnecessary especially to you, since you had personal knowledge of them.
Still, you are aware that the result was nearly always contrary to the prophecy.
But enough on this point: let us now come to portents.
"You have cited many instances of portents from the verses which I wrote during my consulship ; you adduced many others which occurred prior to the Marsian War and which are included in Sisenna's compilation, and you mentioned a great number which are recorded by Callisthenes and which preceded the unfortunate battle of the Spartans at Leuctra.
I shall, of course, speak of each of these instances separately, in so far as they require notice; but I must first discuss portents generally.
Now, what is the nature of these intimations, or of this advance-information, as it were, sent out by the gods to apprise us of coming disasters?
In the first place, why do immortal gods see fit to give us warnings which we can't understand without the aid of interpreters?
In the next place, why do they warn us of things which we cannot avoid?
Why, even a mortal, if he has a proper sense of duty, does not warn his friends of imminent disasters which can in no way be escaped.
Physicians, for example, although they know many times that their patients are going to die of a present disease, yet never tell them so; for a forewarning of an evil is justified only when to the warning is joined a means of escape.
How, then, did portents or their interpreters help the Spartans of long ago, or our Pompeian friends in more recent times?
If these signs you speak of are to be considered as sent by the gods, why were they so obscure?
For, if we had the right to know what was going to happen, it should have been stated to us clearly: or, if the gods did not wish us to know, they should not have told us even in riddles.
"Now every sort of conjecture and divination depends on conjecture is often applied by the wit of man to many different and even contradictory uses.
As in judicial causes the prosecutor draws one inference and the lawyer for the defendant another from the same set of facts, and yet the inferences of both are plausible; so, in all investigations in which it is customary to employ conjecture, ambiguity is found.
Moreover, in the case of things that happen now by chance now in the usual course of nature (sometimes too mistakes are caused by taking appearance for reality), it is the height of folly to hold the gods as the direct agents and not to inquire into the causes of such things.
"You believe that the Boeotian bards at Lebadia foretold victory for the Thebans from the crowing of cocks; for cocks, you say, are wont to be silent when defeated and to crow when victorious.
Do you really believe that Jupiter would have employed chickens to convey such a message to so great a state?
And is it true that these fowls are not accustomed to crow except when they are victorious
But at that time they did crow and they had not been victorious.
' Oh! that was a "portent," 'you say.
A fine portent indeed!
you talk as if a fish and not a cock had done the crowing!
But come; is there any time, day or night, when they are not liable to crow?
And if the pleasant sensation or 'joy' if you will which comes from victory causes them to crow, then, possibly, joy springing from some other source may have the same effect.
By the way, Democritus gives a very good explanation of why cocks crow before day.
'Their food,' he says, ' after it has been digested, is expelled from the craw and is distributed over the entire body.
By the time that process is completed they have had sleep enough and begin to crow.'
And then, 'in the silence of the night,' as Ennius says, ' they indulge their russet throats in song and beat their flapping wings.'
In view, then, of the fact that this creature is prone to crow of its own volition at any time, and may be made to crow either by nature or by chance, how did it ever occur to Callisthenes to say that the gods conveyed prophecies to men by the crowing of cocks?
"'Reports,' you say, 'were made to the Senate that there was a shower of blood, that the river Atratus actually flowed with blood and that the statues of the gods dripped with sweat.
' You do not think for a moment that Thales, Anaxagoras, or any other natural philosopher would have believed such reports?
Sweat and blood you may be sure do not come except from animate bodies.
An effect strikingly like blood is produced by the admixture of water with certain kinds of soil; and the moisture which forms on the outside of objects, as we see it on our plastered walls when the south wind blows, seems to resemble sweat.
Such occurrences, which in time of war appear to the timid to be most frequent and most real, are scarcely noticed in times of peace.
Moreover, in periods of fear and of danger stories of portents are not only more readily believed, but they are invented with greater impunity.
But are we simple and thoughtless enough to think it a portent for mice to gnaw something, when gnawing is their one business in life?
'But,' you say, ' the fact that just before the Marsian War mice gnawed the shields at Lanuvium was pronounced by the soothsayers to be a very direful portent.'
As if it mattered a whit whether mice, which are gnawing something day and night, gnawed shields or sieves!
Hence, by the same token, the fact that, at my house, mice recently gnawed my Plato's Republic should fill me with alarm for the Roman republic; or if they had gnawed my Epicurus On Pleasure I should have expected a rise in the market price of food!
"Are we going to be frightened at these tales of portents, whether of animal or of human birth?
Not to be too verbose, all portents have one and the same explanation and it is this:
whatever comes into existence, of whatever kind, must needs find its cause in nature;
and hence, even though it may be contrary to experience, it cannot be contrary to nature.
Therefore, explore the cause, if you can, of every strange thing that excites your astonishment.
If you do not' find the cause be assured, nevertheless, that nothing could have happened without a cause, and employ the principles of natural philosophy to banish the fear which the novelty of the apparition may have occasioned.
Then no earthquake or opening of the heavens, no showers of stones or blood, no shooting stars, or comets, will fill you with alarm.
"If I were to ask Chrysippus the causes of all the phenomena just mentioned, that distinguished writer on divination would never say that they happened by chance, but he would find an explanation for each of them in the laws of nature.
For he would say: ' Nothing can happen without a cause; nothing actually happens that cannot happen; if that has happened which could have happened, then it should not be considered a portent; therefore there are no such things as portents.'
Now if a thing is to be considered a portent because it is seldom seen, then a wise man is a portent; for, as I think, it oftener happens that a mule brings forth a colt than that nature produces a sage.
Chrysippus, in this connexion, gives the following syllogism: 'That which could not have happened never did happen; and that which could have happened is no portent; therefore, in any view, there is no such thing as a portent.'
This is illustrated by the story of a clever response made by a certain diviner and interpreter of portents.
A man referred to him for interpretation as a portent the fact that a snake was seen at his house, coiled about a beam.
' That was not a portent,' said the diviner; ' it would have been if the beam had been wrapped around the snake.'
By this answer he said plainly enough: ' Nothing that can happen is to be considered a portent.'
"You refer to a letter, written by Gaius Gracchus to Marcus Pomponius, stating that Tiberius Gracchus, father of Gaius, caught two snakes in his house and called together the soothsayers.
And why a conference about snakes rather than about lizards or mice?
You answer, 'Because we see lizards and mice every day; snakes we do not.'
As if it makes any difference how often a thing happens if it can happen at all!
And yet what surprises me is this: If the release of the female snake was to be fatal to Tiberius Gracchus and that of the male was to be the death of Cornelia, why in the world did he let either snake escape?
For Gaius in his letter does not state that the soothsayers expressed any opinion as to the result if neither snake had been released.
'Be that as it may,' you reply, 'death overtook Gracchus.'
That is granted, but his death was caused by some very serious illness and not by the release of the snake.
Besides, soothsayers are not so unlucky that their predictions never come true even by accident!
"I should, of course, marvel at that famous story you got out of Homer about Calchas predicting the years of the Trojan War from the number of sparrows if I believed it!
In a leisure moment I thus translated what Agamemnon in Homer says about this prophecy:
Be patient, men; with fortitude endure Your grievous tasks till we can ascertain If what our Calchas prophesies be true, Or only idle fancies of his breast.
For all who have not left the light of day, In gloomy shades to dwell, retain these signs Imprinted on their minds.
When Aulis first Was decked with Grecian fleets, which carried death For Priam, ruin for Troy, we stood about The fountains cool and sought to please the gods With gold-crowned bulls on smoking altars laid.
Beneath the plane-tree's shade, whence gushed a spring, We saw a frightful dragon, huge of size,With mighty folds, forth from an altar come, By Jove impelled.
It seized some sparrows hid Within the plane-tree's leafy boughs and eight Devoured;
the ninth the mother bird began To flutter round and utter plaintive cries:
From her the cruel beast her vitals tore.
Now when the mother and her tender brood Were slain, the son of Saturn who had sent The dragon forth, took it away;
and then Did change its form into enduring stone.
In fear we stood and watched the monster strange, As midst the altars of the gods it moved.
Then Calchas, full of courage, thus did speak:
'Why paralysed with sudden fear, O Greeks?
These signs divine were sent by Jove himself.
And though these tardy signs were long delayed, Their fame and glory will for ever live.
The number of the birds ye saw destroyed By horrid tooth, portends how many years Of war we shall endure in front of Troy.
The tenth year Troy will fall and then her fate Will satisfy the Greeks.'
Thus Calchas spoke And what he prophesied ye see fulfilled.
But, pray, by what principle of augury does he deduce years rather than months or days from the number of sparrows?
Again, why does he base his prophecy on little sparrows which are not abnormal sights and ignore the alleged fact which is impossible that the dragon was turned to stone?
Finally, what is there about a sparrow to suggest 'years'?
In connexion with your story of the snake which appeared to Sulla when he was offering sacrifices, I recall two facts: first, that when Sulla offered sacrifices, as he was about to begin his march against the enemy, a snake came out from under the altar; and, second, that the glorious victory won by him that day was due not to the soothsayer's art, but to the skill of the general.
"There is nothing remarkable about the so-called portents of the kind just mentioned; but after they have happened they are brought within the field of prophecy by some interpretation.
Take, for example, your stories of the grains of wheat heaped into the mouth of Midas when a boy, and of the bees which settled on the lips of Plato, when he was a child they are more remarkable as guesses than as real prophecies.
Besides, the incidents may have been fictitious; if not, then the fulfilment of the prophecy may have been accidental.
As to that incident about Roscius it may, of course, be untrue that a snake coiled itself around him; but it is not so surprising that a snake was in his cradle especially in Solonium where snakes are attracted in large numbers by the heat of the fireplaces.
As to your statement that the soothsayers prophesied a career of unrivalled brilliancy for Roscius, it is a strange thing to me that the immortal gods foretold the glory of a future actor and did not foretell that of Africanus!
"And you have even collected the portent-stories connected with Flaminius: 'His horse,' you say, 'stumbled and fell with him.'
That is very strange, isn't it?
And, 'The standard of the first company could not be pulled up.'
Perhaps the standard bearer had planted it stoutly and pulled it up timidly.
What is astonishing in the fact that the horse of Dionysius came up out of the river, or that it had bees in its mane?
And yet, because Dionysius began to reign a short time later which was a mere coincidence the event referred to is considered a portent!
'The arms sounded,' you say, 'in the temple of Hercules in Sparta; the folding-doors of the same god at Thebes, though securely barred, opened of their own accord, and the shields hanging upon the walls of that temple fell to the ground.'
Now since none of these things could have happened without some exterior force, why should we say that they were brought about by divine agency rather than by chance?
"You mention the appearance a 'sudden' appearance it was of a crown of wild herbs on the head of Lysander's statue at Delphi.
Really?
And do you think the crown of herbs appeared before their seeds were formed?
Besides, the wild herbs, in my opinion, came from seeds brought by birds and were not planted by human agency.
Again, imagination can make anything on top of a head look like a crown.
'At the same time,' you say, ' the golden stars in the temple of Castor and Pollux at Delphi fell down and were nowhere to be found.'
That appears to me to have been the work of thieves rather than of gods.
I am indeed astonished that Greek historians should have recorded the mischievous pranks of the Dodonean ape.
For what is less strange than for this hideous beast to have turned over the vase and scattered the lots?
And yet the historians declare that no portent more direful than this ever befell the Spartans!
"You spoke also of the Veientine prophecy that 'if Lake Albanus overflowed and emptied into the sea, Rome would fall, but if held in check Veii would fall.'
Well, it turned out that the water from the lake was drawn off but it was drawn off through irrigation ditches not to save the Capitol and the city, but to improve the farming lands.
' And, not long after this occurred, a voice was heard,' you say, 'warning the people to take steps to prevent the capture of Rome by the Gauls.
Therefore an altar was erected on the Nova Via in honour of Aius the Speaker.'
But why?
Did your' Aius the Speaker,' before anybody knew who he was, both speak and talk and from that fact receive his name?
And after he had secured a seat, an altar, and a name did he become mute?
Your Juno Moneta may likewise be dismissed with a question: What did she ever admonish us about except the pregnant sow?
"Enough has been said of portents; auspices remain and so do lots I mean ' lots' that are drawn, and not those uttered by prophets, and more correctly styled ' oracles.'
I shall speak of oracles when I get to natural divination.
In addition I must discuss the Chaldeans.
But first let us consider auspices.
'To argue against auspices is a hard thing,' you say, 'for an augur to do.'
Yes, for a Marsian, perhaps; but very easy for a Roman.
For we Roman augurs are not the sort who foretell the future by observing the flights of birds and other signs.
And yet, I admit that Romulus, who founded the city by the direction of auspices, believed that augury was an art useful in seeing things to come for the ancients had erroneous views on many subjects.
But we see that the art has undergone a change, due to experience, education, or the long lapse of time.
However, out of respect for the opinion of the masses and because of the great service to the State we maintain the augural practices, discipline, religious rites and laws, as well as the authority of the augural college.
"In my opinion the consuls, Publius Claudius and Lucius Junius, who set sail contrary to the auspices, were deserving of capital punishment; for they should have respected the established religion and should not have treated the customs of their forefathers with such shameless disdain.
Therefore it was a just retribution that the former was condemned by a vote of the people and that the latter took his own life.
' Flaminius,' you say,' did not obey the auspices, therefore he perished with his army.'
But a year later Paulus did obey them; and did he not lose his army and his life in the battle of Cannae?
Granting that there are auspices (as there are not), certainly those which we ordinarily employ whether by the tripudium or by the observation of the heavens are not auspices in any sense, but are the mere ghosts of auspices.
"'Quintus Fabius, I wish you to assist me at the auspices.'
He answers, ' I will.'
(In our forefathers' time the magistrates on such occasions used to call in some expert person to take the auspices but in these days anyone will do.
But one must be an expert to know what constitutes ' silence,' for by that term we mean 'free of every augural defect.'
To understand that belongs to a perfect augur.)
After the celebrant has said to his assistant, 'Tell me when silence appears to exist,' the latter, without looking up or about him, immediately replies, 'Silence appears to exist.'
Then the celebrant says, 'Tell me when the chickens begin to eat.'
'They are eating now,' is the answer.
But what are these birds they are talking about, and where are they?
Someone replies,' It's poultry. It's in a cage and the person who brought it is called "a poulterer," because of his business.'
These, then, are the messengers of Jove!
What difference does it make whether they eat or not?
None, so far as the auspices are concerned.
But, because of the fact that, while they eat, some food must necessarily fall from their mouths and strike upon the ground,
this at first was called terripavium, and later, terripudium; now it is called tripudium
therefore, when a crumb of food falls from a chicken's mouth a tripudium solistimum is announced to the celebrant.
"Then, how can there be anything divine about an auspice so forced and so extorted?
That such a practice did not prevail with the augurs of ancient times is proven by an old ruling of our college which says,' Any bird may make a tripudium.'
There might be an auspice if the bird were free to show itself outside its cage.
In that case it might be called 'the interpreter and satellite of Jove.'
But now, when shut up inside a cage and tortured by hunger, if it seizes greedily upon its morsel of pottage and something falls from its mouth, do you consider that is an auspice? Or do you believe that this was the way in which Romulus used to take the auspices?
Again, do you not think that formerly it was the habit of the celebrants themselves to make observation of the heavens?
Now they order the poulterer, and he gives responses!
We regard lightning on the left as a most favourable omen for everything except for an election, and this exception was made, no doubt, from reasons of political expediency so that the rulers of the State would be the judges of the regularity of an election, whether held to pass judgements in criminal cases, or to enact laws, or to elect magistrates.
"'The consuls, Scipio and Figulus,' you say, 'resigned their office when the augurs rendered a decision based on a letter written by Tiberius Gracchus, to the effect that those consuls had not been elected according to augural law.'
Who denies that augury is an art?
What I deny is the existence of divination.
But you say: ' Soothsayers have the power of divination'; and you mention the fact that, on account of the unexpected death of the person who had suddenly fallen while bringing in the report of the vote of the prerogative century, Tiberius Gracchus introduced the soothsayers into the Senate and they declared that 'the president' had violated augural law.
Now, in the first place, do not understand that by 'the president' they meant the president of the prerogative century, for he was dead; and, moreover, they could have told that by conjecture without the use of divination;
or, in the second place, perhaps, they said so by accident which is in no wise to be left out of account in cases of this kind.
For what could the Etruscan soothsayers have known, either as to whether the tabernaculum had been properly placed, or as to whether the regulations pertaining to the pomerium had been observed?
For my part, I agree with Gaius Marcellus, rather than with Appius Claudius both of whom were my colleagues and I think that, although in the beginning augural law was established from a belief in divination, yet later it was maintained and preserved from considerations of political expediency.
But we shall discuss the latter point at greater length in other discourses; let us dismiss it for the present.
"Now let us examine augury as practised among foreign nations, whose methods are not so artificial as they are superstitious.
They employ almost all kinds of birds, we only a few; they regard some signs as favourable, we, others.
Deiotarus used to question me a great deal about our system of augury, and I him about that of his country.
Ye gods!
how much they differed!
So much that in some cases they were directly the reverse of each other.
He employed auspices constantly, we never do except when the duty of doing so is imposed by a vote of the people.
Our ancestors would not undertake any military enterprise without consulting the auspices; but now, for many years, our wars have been conducted by pro-consuls and propraetors, who do not have the right to take auspices.
Therefore they have no tripudium and they cross rivers without first taking the auspices.
What, then, has become of divining by means of birds?
It is not used by those who conduct our wars, for they have not the right of auspices; Since it has been withdrawn from use in the field I suppose it is reserved for city use only!
"As to divination ex acuminibus, which is altogether military, it was wholly ignored by that famous man, Marcus Marcellus, who was consul five times and, besides, was a commander-in-chief, as well as a very fine augur.
In fact, he used to say that, if he wished to execute some manuever which he did not want interfered with by the auspices, he would travel in a closed litter.
His method is of a kind with the advice which we augurs give, that the draught-cattle be ordered to be unyoked so as to prevent a iuge auspicium.
What else does a refusal to be warned by Jove accomplish except either to prevent an auspice from occurring, or, if it occurs, to prevent it from being seen?
"Your story about Deiotarus is utterly absurd: ' He did not regret the auspices given him as he was setting out to join Pompey.
They caused him to continue in the path of loyalty and friendship to the Roman people and to perform his duty; for he valued his reputation and glory more than kingdom and riches.'
I dare say; but that has nothing to do with auspices.
For the crow could not tell Deiotarus that he was doing right in preparing to defend the liberty of the Roman people.
He ought to have realized that of himself, and in fact he did.
Birds indicate that results will be unfavourable or favourable.
In my view of the case Deiotarus employed the auspices of virtue, and virtue bids us not to look to fortune until the claims of honour are discharged.
However, if the birds indicated that the issue would be favourable to Deiotarus they certainly deceived him.
He fled from the battle with Pompey a serious situation!
He separated from Pompey an occasion of sorrow!
He beheld Caesar at once his enemy and his guest; what could have been more distressing than that?
Caesar wrested from him the tetrarchy over the Trocmi and conferred it upon some obscure sycophant of his own from Pergamus; deprived him of Armenia, a gift from the Senate; accepted a most lavish hospitality at the hands of his royal host and left him utterly despoiled.
But I wander too far: I must return to the point at issue.
If we examine this matter from the standpoint of the results and that was the question submitted to the determination of the birds the issue was in no sense favourable to Deiotarus; but if we examine it from the standpoint of duty, he sought information on that score not from the auspices, but from his own conscience.
"Then dismiss Romulus's augural staff, which you say the hottest of fires was powerless to burn, and attach slight importance to the whetstone of Attus Navius.
Myths should have no place in philosophy.
It would have been more in keeping with your role as a philosopher to consider, first, the nature of divination generally, second, its origin, and third, its consistency.
What, then, is the nature of an art which makes prophets out of birds that wander aimlessly about now here, now there and makes the action or inaction of men depend upon the song or flight of birds?
and why was the power granted to some birds to give a favourable omen when on the left side and to others when on the right?
Again, how, when, and by whom, shall we say that the system was invented?
The Etruscans, it is true, find the author of their system in the boy who was ploughed up out of the ground; but whom have we? Attus Navius?
But Romulus and Remus, both of whom, by tradition, were augurs, lived many years earlier.
Are we to say that it was invented by the Pisidians, Cilicians, or Phrygians?
It is your judgement, then, that those devoid of human learning are the authors of a divine science!
"'But,' you say, ' all kings, peoples, and nations employ auspices.'
As if there were anything so absolutely common as want of sense, or as if you yourself in deciding anything would accept the opinion of the mob!
How often will you find a man who will say that pleasure is not a good!
Most people actually call it the highest good.
Then will the Stoics abandon their views about pleasure because the crowd is against them?
or do you think that the multitude follows the lead of the Stoics in very many matters?
What wonder, then, if in auspices and in every kind of divination weak minds should adopt the superstitious practices which you have mentioned and should be unable to discern the truth?
Moreover, there is no uniformity, and no consistent and constant agreement between augurs.
Ennius, speaking with reference to the Roman system of augury, said:
Then on the left, from out a cloudless sky, Jove's thunder rolled its goodly omen forth.
But Homer's Ajax in complaining to Achilles of some ferocious deed or other of the Trojans, speaks in this wise: For their success Jove thunders on the right.
So we regard signs on the left as best Greeks and barbarians, those on the right.
And yet I am aware that we call favourable signs sinistra, or 'left-hand' signs, even though they may be on the right.
Undoubtedly our ancestors in choosing the left side and foreign nations the right were both influenced by what experience had shown them was the more favourable quarter in most cases.
What a conflict this is!
In view, then, of the differences between different nations in the responses, in the manner in which observations are made and in the kinds of birds and signs employed, need I assert that divination is compounded of a little error, a little superstition, and a good deal of fraud?
"And to these superstitions you have actually joined omens!
For example: ' Aemilia told Paulus that Persa was dead and her father accepted this as an omen.'
' Caecilia said that she surrendered her seat to her sister's daughter.'
Then you go on and speak of the order of silence, favete linguis and the 'prerogative,' or omen of the elections.
This is indeed turning the artillery of one's eloquence and learning against oneself!
For while on the watch for these 'oracles' of yours could you be so free and calm of mind that you would have reason and not superstition to guide your course?
Now, if a person in the course of his own business or conversation should make some remark, and a word spoken by him happened to apply to what you were doing or thinking, do you really believe that such an accident should cause you either fear or joy?
When Marcus Crassus was embarking his army at Brundisium a man who was selling Caunian figs at the harbour, repeatedly cried out,' Cauneas, Cauneas.'
Let us say, if you will, that this was a warning to Crassus to bid him 'Beware of going,' and that if he had obeyed the omen he would not have perished.
But if we are going to accept chance utterances of this kind as omens, we had better look out when we stumble, or break a shoe-string, or sneeze!
"Lots and the Chaldean astrologers remain to be discussed before we come to prophets and to dreams.
And pray what is the need, do you think, to talk about the casting of lots?
It is much like playing at morra, dice, or knuckle-bones, in which recklessness and luck prevail rather than reflection and judgement.
The whole scheme of divination by lots was fraudulently contrived from mercenary motives, or as a means of encouraging superstition and error.
But let us follow the method used in the discussion of soothsaying and consider the traditional origin of the most famous lots.
According to the annals of Praeneste Numerius Suffustius, who was a distinguished man of noble birth, was admonished by dreams, often repeated, and finally even by threats, to split open a flint rock which was lying in a designated place.
Frightened by the visions and disregarding the jeers of his fellow-townsmen he set about doing as he had been directed.
And so when he had broken open the stone, the lots sprang forth carved on oak, in ancient characters.
The site where the stone was found is religiously guarded to this day; It is hard by the statue of the infant Jupiter, who is represented as sitting with Juno in the lap of Fortune and reaching for her breast, and it is held in the highest reverence by mothers.
"There is a tradition that, concurrently with the finding of the lots and in the spot where the temple of Fortune now stands, honey flowed from an olive-tree.
Now the soothsayers, who had declared that those lots would enjoy an unrivalled reputation, gave orders that a chest should be made from the tree and the lots placed in the chest.
At the present time the lots are taken from their receptacle if Fortune directs.
What reliance, pray, can you put in these lots, which at Fortune's nod are shuffled and drawn by the hand of a child?
And how did they ever get in that rock?
Who cut down the oak-tree? and who fashioned and carved the lots?
Oh! but somebody says, ' God can bring anything to pass.'
If so, then I wish he had made the Stoics wise, so that they would not be so pitiably and distressingly superstitious and so prone to believe everything they hear!
This sort of divining, however, has now been discarded by general usage.
The beauty and age of the temple still preserve the name of the lots of Praeneste that is, among the common people,
for no magistrate and no man of any reputation ever consults them;
but in all other places lots have gone entirely out of use.
And this explains the remark which, according to Clitomachus, Carneades used to make that he had at no other place seen Fortune more fortunate than at Praeneste.
Then let us dismiss this branch of divination.
"Let us come to Chaldean manifestations.
In discussing them Plato's pupil, Eudoxus, whom the best scholars consider easily the first in astronomy, has left the following opinion in writing: 'No reliance whatever is to be placed in Chaldean astrologers when they profess to forecast a man's future from the position of the stars on the day of his birth.'
Panaetius, too, who was the only one of the Stoics to reject the prophecies of astrologers, mentions Anchialus and Cassander as the greatest astronomers of his day and states that they did not employ their art as a means of divining, though they were eminent in all other branches of astronomy.
Scylax of Halicarnassus, an intimate friend of Panaetius, and an eminent astronomer, besides being the head of the government in his own city, utterly repudiated the Chaldean method of foretelling the future.
"But let us dismiss our witnesses and employ reasoning.
Those men who defend the natal-day prophecies of the Chaldeans, argue in this way:
' In the starry belt which the Greeks call the Zodiac there is a certain force of such a nature that every part of that belt affects and changes the heavens in a different way, according to the stars that are in this or in an adjoining locality at a given time.
This force is variously affected by those stars which are called 'planets' or 'wandering' stars.
But when they have come into that sign of the Zodiac under which someone is born, or into a sign having some connexion or accord with the natal sign, they form what is called a 'triangle' or 'square.'
Now since, through the procession and retrogression of the stars, the great variety and change of the seasons and of temperature take place, and since the power of the sun produces such results as are before our eyes, they believe that it is not merely probable, but certain, that just as the temperature of the air is regulated by this celestial force, so also children at their birth are influenced in soul and body and by this force their minds, manners, disposition, physical condition, career in life and destinies are determined.
"What inconceivable madness!
For it is not enough to call an opinion 'foolishness' when it is utterly devoid of reason.
However, Diogenes the Stoic makes some concession to the Chaldeans.
He says that they have the power of prophecy to the extent of being able to tell the disposition of any child and the calling for which he is best fitted.
All their other claims of prophetic powers he absolutely denies.
He says, for example, that twins are alike in appearance, but that they are generally unlike in career and in fortune.
Procles and Eurysthenes, kings of the Lacedaemonians, were twin brothers.
But they did not live the same number of years, for the life of Procles was shorter by a year than that of his brother and his deeds were far more glorious.
But for my part I say that even this concession which our excellent friend Diogenes makes to the Chaldeans in a sort of collusive way, is in itself unintelligible.
For the Chaldeans, according to their own statements, believe that a person's destiny is affected by the condition of the moon at the time of his birth, and hence they make and record their observations of the stars which appear to be in conjunction with the moon on his birthday.
As a result, in forming their judgements, they depend on the sense of sight, which is the least trustworthy of the senses, whereas they should employ reason and intelligence.
For the science of mathematics, which the Chaldeans ought to know, teaches us how close the moon comes to the earth, which indeed it almost touches; how far it is from Mercury, the nearest star; how much further yet it is from Venus; and what a great interval separates it from the sun, which is supposed to give it light.
The three remaining distances are beyond computation: from the Sun to Mars, from Mars to Jupiter, from Jupiter to Saturn.
Then there is the distance from Saturn to the limits of heaven the ultimate bounds of space.
In view, therefore, of these almost limitless distances, what influence can the planets exercise upon the moon, or rather, upon the earth?
"Again, when the Chaldeans say, as they are bound to do, that all persons born anywhere in the habitable earth under the same horoscope, are alike and must have the same fate, is it not evident that these would-be interpreters of the sky are of a class who are utterly ignorant of the nature of the sky?
For the earth is, as it were, divided in half and our view limited by those circles which the Greeks call , and which we may in all accuracy term finientes or horizons.
Now these horizons vary without limit according to the position of the spectator.
Hence, of necessity, the rising and setting of the stars will not occur at the same time for all persons.
But if this stellar force affects the heavens now in one way and now in another, how is it possible for this force to operate alike on all persons who are born at the same time, in view of the fact that they are born under vastly different skies?
In those places in which we live the Dogstar rises after the solstice, in fact, several days later.
But among the Troglodytes, we read, it sets before the solstice.
Hence if we should now admit that some stellar influence affects persons who are born upon the earth, then it must be conceded that all persons born at the same time may have different natures owing to the differences in their horoscopes.
This is a conclusion by no means agreeable to the astrologers; for they insist that all persons born at the same time, regardless of the place of birth, are born to the same fate.
"But what utter madness in these astrologers, in considering the effect of the vast movements and changes in the heavens, to assume that wind and rain and weather anywhere have no effect at birth!
In neighbouring places conditions in these respects are so different that frequently, for instance, we have one state of weather at Tusculum and another at Rome.
This is especially noticeable to mariners who often observe extreme changes of weather take place while they are rounding the capes.
Therefore, in view of the fact that the heavens are now serene and now disturbed by storms, is it the part of a reasonable man to say that this fact has no natal influence and of course it has not and then assert that a natal influence is exerted by some subtle, imperceptible, well-nigh inconceivable force which is due to the condition of the sky, which condition, in turn, is due to the action of the moon and stars?
"Again, is it no small error of judgement that the Chaldeans fail to realize the effect of the parental seed which is an essential element in the process of generation?
For, surely, no one fails to see that the appearance and habits, and generally, the carriage and gestures of children are derived from their parents.
This would not be the case if the characteristics of children were determined, not by the natural power of heredity, but by the phases of the moon and by the condition of the sky.
And, again, the fact that men who were born at the very same instant, are unlike in character, career, and in destiny, makes it very clear that the time of birth has nothing to do in determining man's course in life.
That is, unless perchance we are to believe that nobody else was conceived and born at the very same time that Africanus was.
For was there ever anyone like him?
"Furthermore, is it not a well-known and undoubted fact that many persons who were born with certain natural defects have been restored completely by Nature herself, after she had resumed her sway, or by surgery or by medicine?
For example, some, who were so tongue-tied that they could not speak, have had their tongues set free by a cut from the surgeon's knife.
Many more have corrected a natural defect by intelligent exertion.
Derosthenes is an instance: according to the account given by Phalereus, he was unable to pronounce the Greek letter rho but by repeated effort learned to articulate it perfectly.
But if such defects had been engendered and implanted by a star nothing could have changed them.
Do not unlike places produce unlike men?
It would be an easy matter to sketch rapidly in passing the differences in mind and body which distinguish the Indians from the Persians and the Ethiopians from the Syrians differences so striking and so pronounced as to be incredible.
Hence it is evident that one's birth is more affected by local environment than by the condition of the moon.
Of course, the statement quoted by you that the Babylonians for , years had taken the horoscope of every child and had tested it by the results, is untrue; for if this had been their habit they would not have abandoned it.
Moreover we find no writer who says that the practice exists or who knows that it ever did exist.
"You observe that I am not repeating the arguments of Carneades, but those of Panaetius, the head of the Stoic school.
But now on my own initiative I put the following questions: Did all the Romans who fell at Cannae have the same horoscope?
Yet all had one and the same end.
Were all the men eminent for intellect and genius born under the same star?
Was there ever a day when countless numbers were not born?
And yet there never was another Homer.
Again: if it matters under what aspect of the sky or combination of the stars every animate being is born, then necessarily the same conditions affect inanimate things also: can any statement be more ridiculous than that?
Be that as it may, our good friend Lucius Tarutius of Firmum, who was steeped in Chaldaic lore, made a calculation, based on the assumption that our city's birthday was on the Feast of Pales (at which time tradition says it was founded by Romulus), and from that calculation Tarutius even went so far as to assert that Rome was born when the moon was in the sign of Libra and from that fact unhesitatingly prophesied her destiny.
What stupendous power delusion has!
And was the city's natal day also subject to the influence of the moon and stars?
Assume, if you will, that it matters in the case of a child under what arrangement of the heavenly bodies it draws its first breath, does it also follow that the stars could have had any influence over the bricks and cement of which the city was built?
But why say more against a theory which every day's experience refutes?
I recall a multitude of prophecies which the Chaldeans made to Pompey, to Crassus and even to Caesar himself (now lately deceased), to the effect that no one of them would die except in old age, at home and in great glory.
Hence it would seem very strange to me should anyone, especially at this time, believe in men whose predictions he sees disproved every day by actual results.
There remain the two kinds of divination which we are said to derive from nature and not from art: vaticination and dreams,
these, my dear Quintus, if agreeable to you, let us now discuss.
Delighted, I assure you, said he, "for I am in entire accord with the views which you have so far expressed.
To be quite frank, your argument has merely strengthened the opinion which I already had, for my own reasoning had convinced me that the Stoic view of divination smacked too much of superstition.
I was more impressed by the reasoning of the Peripatetics, of Dicaearchus, of ancient times, and of Cratippus, who still flourishes.
According to their opinion there is within the human soul some sort of power ' oracular,' I might call it by which the future is foreseen when the soul is inspired by a divine frenzy, or when it is released by sleep and is free to move at will.
I should like very much to learn your views of these two classes of divination and by what arguments you disprove them."
After this statement had been made by Quintus, I began again, making a new start, so to speak:
"I am well aware, my dear Quintus, that, while you have always felt a doubt about all other kinds of divination, you approve of the two you just mentioned divination by frenzy and divination by dreams, both of which, it is thought, flow from a soul set free.
Let me, then, state my opinion of these two kinds of divination.
But, first, let me examine that syllogism of the Stoics and of our friend Cratippus and see how sound it is.
You stated the syllogism of Chrysippus, Diogenes, and Antipater in this way:
"'If there are gods and they do not make clear to man in advance what the future will be, then they do not love man, or they themselves do not know what the future will be; or they think that it is of no advantage to man to know what the future will be; or they think it inconsistent with their dignity to give to man forewarnings of the future; or they, though gods, cannot give signs of coming events.
But it is not true that the gods do not love us (for they are the friends and benefactors of the human race);
nor is it true that they do not know what they themselves have determined and planned;
nor is it true that it is of no advantage to us to know what is going to happen (for man would be more prudent if he knew);
nor is it true that the gods think it inconsistent with their dignity to give forecasts of the future (for there is no more excellent quality than kindness);
nor is it true that they have not the power to know the future;
therefore, it is not true that there are gods and yet that they do not give us signs of the future; but there are gods; therefore they give us such signs; and it is not true, if they give us such signs, that they give us no means of understanding those signs, otherwise their signs would be useless; nor, if they give us the means, is it true that there is no divination: therefore divination exists.'
"What keen-witted men!
With how very few words they think the business dispatched!
But to establish their syllogism they take propositions for granted which are not conceded at all;
yet a chain of reasoning, to be valid, should proceed from premises which are not doubtful to the conclusion which is in dispute.
"Pray observe the neat way in which Epicurus (whom you Stoics usually call a blundering idiot) proves that what we term ' the universe' is infinite.
'That,' said he, 'which is finite has an end.'
Who would deny that?
Again, 'That which has an end is seen from some point outside itself.'
That, too, must be granted.
'But the universe is not seen from without itself.'
We cannot question that proposition either.
'Therefore, since it has no end the universe must be infinite.'
You see how Epicurus proceeds from admitted premises to the proposition to be established.
But this you Stoic logicians do not do; for you not only do not assume premises which everybody concedes, but you even assume premises which, if granted, do not tend in the least to establish what you wish to prove.
For you start with this assumption: ' If there are gods they are kindly disposed towards men.'
Now who will grant you that?
Epicurus?
But he says that the gods do not trouble a whit about themselves or about anybody else.
Is it our own Ennius?
But he says with general approval and applause, I always said that there were gods on high,
And this I never will neglect to say; But my opinion is they do not care What destiny befalls the human race.
To be sure he proceeds to give the reason for his opinion in succeeding lines, but there is no need to repeat them.
Enough has been shown to make it clear that your Stoic friends assume as certain what is the subject of doubt and discussion.
"But the syllogism goes on to say: 'The gods are not ignorant of anything, for all things were ordained by them.'
But what a heavy attack is made on this very point by scholars who deny that such and such things were ordained by the immortal gods!
' But it is to our interest to know what is going to happen.'
Yet Dicaearchus has written a large volume to prove that it is better not to know than to know the future.
They say further: ' It is not inconsistent with the dignity of gods to give knowledge of the future.'
But entirely consistent, I presume, for them to peer into every man's house to see what he needs!
'It is not true that the gods cannot know the future.'
But their ability to know is denied by those who maintain that it is not certain what the future will be.
Now don't you see what doubtful premises they assume to be certain and take for granted?
Next they hurl this dialectical dart: 'Therefore it is not true both that there are gods and yet that they do not give signs of the future.'
And of course they think that the matter is now settled.
Then they make another assumption: 'But there are gods.'
Even that is not conceded by everybody.
'Therefore they give signs of the future.'
Not necessarily so: for they may not give us signs of the future and still be gods.
'Nor is it true that, if they give such signs, they give no means of interpreting those signs.'
But it may be that they have the means and yet do not impart them to man; for why would they impart them to the Etruscans rather than to the Romans?
Again, the Stoics say: ' If the gods do impart the means, that is divination.'
Grant that they do (which is absurd), what is the good if we do not understand?
Their conclusion is: ' Therefore there is divination.'
Suppose that is their conclusion, still they have not proved it; for, as they themselves have taught us, the truth cannot be proved from false premises.
Hence their entire argument falls to the ground.
"Now let us come to the argument of that most worthy gentleman, our intimate friend, Cratippus:
"'Though without eyes,' he says,' it is impossible to perform the act and function of sight, and though the eyes sometimes cannot perform their appointed function, yet when a person has once so employed his eyes as to see things as they are, he has a realization of what correct vision is.
Likewise, too, although without the power of divination it is impossible for the act and function of divining to exist, and though one with that power may be mistaken and may make erroneous prophecies, yet to establish the existence of divination it is enough that a single event has been so clearly foretold as to exclude the hypothesis of chance.
But there are many such instances; therefore the existence of divination must be conceded.'
"Delightfully and briefly put; but after he has twice made gratuitous assumptions, even though he has found us quite generous in making concessions, yet his further assumption cannot possibly be conceded.
He says in substance, 'If the eyes are sometimes at fault, yet, because they have sometimes seen correctly, the power of sight resides within them; likewise if a person has once foreseen something by means of divination, yet even when he errs in his predictions, he must be held to have the power of divination.'
"Pray point out, my dear Cratippus, the similarity in these propositions of yours.
I confess that it is not apparent to me.
For the eyes in seeing correctly employ a sense conferred by nature; while the soul, if it ever has a true vision of the future, whether by vaticination or by dreams, relies upon luck or chance.
This you must admit unless, perchance, you think that those who consider dreams as dreams and nothing more, are going to concede that the fulfilment of any dream was ever due to anything but luck.
While we may grant your two major premises, these the Greeks call , but we prefer to call them by their Latin equivalent "sumptiones" yet we will not grant your minor premise which the Greeks call .
"Cratippus states his minor premise thus: 'But there are countless instances of prophecies being fulfilled without the intervention of luck.'
On the contrary, I say there isn't even one.
Observe how keen the controversy grows!
Now that the minor premise is denied the conclusion fails.
But he retorts: ' You are unreasonable not to grant it, it is so evident.'
Why 'evident'?
'Because many prophecies come true.'
And what of the fact that many more don't come true?
Does not this very uncertainty, which is characteristic of luck, demonstrate that their fulfilment is accounted for by luck and not by any law of nature?
Furthermore, my dear Cratippus for my controversy is with you if that argument of yours is sound, don't you see that it is equally available in behalf of the means of divination practised by soothsayers, augurs, Chaldeans and by interpreters of lightnings, portents, and lots?
For each of these classes will furnish you with at least one instance of a prophecy that came to pass.
Therefore either they too are all means of divining and this you very properly deny or, if they are not, then, so far as I can see, the two classes which you permit to remain are not means of divining.
Hence the same reasoning employed by you to establish the two kinds which you accept may be used to establish the others which you reject.
"But what weight is to be given to that frenzy of yours, which you term ' divine' and which enables the crazy man to see what the wise man does not see, and invests the man who has lost human intelligence with the intelligence of gods?
We Romans venerate the verses of the Sibyl who is said to have uttered them while in a frenzy.
Recently there was a rumour, which was believed at the time, but turned out to be false, that one of the interpreters of those verses was going to declare in the Senate that, for our safety, the man whom we had as king in fact should be made king also in name.
If this is in the books, to what man and to what time does it refer?
For it was clever in the author to take care that whatever happened should appear foretold because all reference to persons or time had been omitted.
He also employed a maze of obscurity so that the same verses might be adapted to different situations at different times.
Moreover, that this poem is not the work of frenzy is quite evident from the quality of its composition (for it exhibits artistic care rather than emotional excitement), and is especially evident from the fact that it is written in what are termed 'acrostics,' wherein the initial letters of each verse taken in order convey a meaning; as, for example, in some of Ennius's verses, the initial letters form the words, Quintus Ennius Fecit, that is, ' Quintus Ennius wrote it.'
That surely is the work of concentrated thought and not of a frenzied brain.
And in the Sibylline books, throughout the entire work, each prophecy is embellished with an acrostic, so that the initial letters of each of the lines give the subject of that particular prophecy.
Such a work comes from a writer who is not frenzied, who is painstaking, not crazy.
Therefore let us keep the Sibyl under lock and key so that in accordance with the ordinances of our forefathers her books may not even be read without permission of the Senate and may be more effective in banishing rather than encouraging superstitious ideas.
And let us plead with the priests to bring forth from those books anything rather than a king, whom henceforth neither gods nor men will suffer to exist in Rome.
"But many persons in a frenzy often utter true prophecies, as Cassandra did when she said: Already on the mighty deep and when, a little later, she exclaimed, Alas! behold!
Then, I suppose you are going to force me to believe in myths?
Let them be as charming as you please and as finished as possible in language, thought, rhythm, and melody, still we ought not to give credence to fictitious incidents or to quote them as authority.
On that principle no reliance, in my opinion, should be placed in the prophecies of your Publicius, whoever he may have been or in those of the Marcian bards or in those of the hazy oracles of Apollo : some were obviously false and others mere senseless chatter and none of them were ever believed in by any man of ordinary sense, much less by any person of wisdom.
but what about that oarsman in Coponius's fleet,' you say, 'didn't he truly foretell what afterwards came to pass?
' He did indeed, and the very things that all of us at the time feared would happen.
For news was coming to us that the armies of Caesar and Pompey were facing each other in Thessaly.
We thought that Caesar's troops had more reckless courage because they were fighting against their country and greater strength because of their long military training.
Besides there was not one of us who did not dread the outcome of the battle, but our apprehension was not openly shown and was such as not to be discreditable to men of strong character.
As for that Greek sailor, is it strange if, in the extremity of his fear, he, as most people do in such cases, lost his courage, reason, and self-control?
In his mental excitement and aberration, he merely stated that things would occur, which, when he was himself, he feared would come to pass.
In heaven's name, pray tell me, then, which you think was more likely to have had the power to interpret the decrees of the immortal gods: that crazy sailor, or someone of our party then on the ground-Cato, Varro, Coponius or I?
"But now I come to you, Apollo, sacred guard of earth's true core, Whence first came frenzied, wild prophetic words.
Chrysippus filled a whole volume with your oracles ; of these some, as I think, were false; some came true by chance, as happens very often even in ordinary speech; some were so intricate and obscure that their interpreter needs an interpreter and the oracles themselves must be referred back to the oracle; and some so equivocal that they require a dialectician to construe them.
For example, when the following oracular response was made to Asia's richest king:
When Croesus o'er the river Halys goes He will a mighty kingdom overthrow,
Croesus thought that he would overthrow his enemy's kingdom, whereas he overthrew his own.
But in either event the oracle would have been true.
Besides, why need I believe that this oracle was ever given to Croesus?
or why should I consider Herodotus more truthful than Ennius?
and was the former less able to invent stories about Croesus than Ennius was about Pyrrhus?
For instance, nobody believes Ennius when he says that Apollo's oracle gave the following response to Pyrrhus:
O son of Aeacus, my prediction is That you the Roman army will defeat.
In the first place Apollo never spoke in Latin;
second, that oracle is unknown to the Greeks;
third, in the days of Pyrrhus Apollo had already ceased making verses,
and, finally, although "the sons of Aeacus have ever been," as Ennius says, a stolid race, And more for valour than for wisdom famed, still Pyrrhus would have had sense enough to see that the equivocal line "You the Roman army will defeat" was no more favourable to him than to the Romans.
As for that equivocal response which deceived Croesus, it might have deceived Chrysippus, for example; but the one made to Pyrrhus wouldn't have fooled even Epicurus!
"However, the main question is this: Why are Delphic oracles (of which I have just given you examples) not uttered at the present time and have not been for a long time? And why are they regarded with the utmost contempt?
When pressed at this point their apologists affirm that 'the long flight of time has gradually dissipated the virtue of the place whence came those subterranean exhalations which inspired the Pythian priestess to utter oracles.'
One might think that they are talking about wine or brine which do evaporate.
But the question is about the virtue of a place, a virtue which you call not only 'natural' but even 'divine,' pray how did it evaporate?
'By length of time,' you say.
But what length of time could destroy a divine power?
And what is as divine as a subterranean exhalation that inspires the soul with power to foresee the future a power such that it not only sees things a long time before they happen, but actually foretells them in rhythmic verse?
When did the virtue disappear?
Was it after men began to be less credulous?
"By the way, Demosthenes, who lived nearly three hundred years ago, used to say even then that the Pythian priestess 'philippized, in other words, that she was Philip's ally.
By this expression he meant to infer that she had been bribed by Philip.
Hence we may conclude that in other instances the Delphic oracles were not entirely free of guile.
But, for some inexplicable cause, those superstitious and half-cracked philosophers of yours would rather appear absurd than anything else in the world.
You Stoics, instead of rejecting these incredible tales, prefer to believe that a power had gradually faded into nothingness, whereas if it ever had existed it certainly would be eternal.
"There is a like error in regard to dreams.
How far-fetched is the argument in their defence!
'Our souls' (according to the view of your school) ' are divine and are derived from an external source; the universe is filled with a multitude of harmonious souls; therefore, because of its divinity and its contact with other souls, the human soul during sleep foresees what is to come.'
But Zeno thinks that sleep is nothing more than a contraction a slipping and a collapse, as it were of the human soul.
Then Pythagoras and Plato, who are most respectable authorities, bid us, if we would have trustworthy dreams, to prepare for sleep by following a prescribed course in conduct and in eating.
The Pythagoreans make a point of prohibiting the use of beans, as if thereby the soul and not the belly was filled with wind!
Somehow or other no statement is too absurd for some philosophers to make.
"Then shall we believe that the souls of sleepers while dreaming are spontaneously moved?
or, as Democritus thinks, that they are impelled to action by phantoms from without ?
Whether the one theory or the other be correct, the fact remains that men in sleep assume many false apparitions to be true.
Likewise, to men who are sailing, stationary objects on shore seem to be moving; and also, sometimes in looking at a lamp, by some sort of optical illusion we see two flames instead of one.
Why need I mention how many non-existent things are seen by men who are drunk or crazy?
And if we are to put no trust in such apparitions of the waking man I do not understand why we should put any trust in dreams.
Of course you may argue, if you will, about these tricks of vision as you would about dreams, and say, for example, that when stationary objects appear to be in motion, it foretells an earthquake or a sudden flight; and when the lamp's flame appears to be double it portends that insurrection and rebellion are afoot!
"By applying conjecture to the countless delusions of drunk or crazy men we may sometimes deduce what appears to be a real prophecy;
for who, if he shoots at a mark all day long, will not occasionally hit it?
We sleep every night and there is scarcely ever a night when we do not dream; then do we wonder that our dreams come true sometimes?
Nothing is so uncertain as a cast of dice
and yet there is no one who plays often who does not sometimes make a Venus-throw and occasionally twice or thrice in succession.
Then are we, like fools, to prefer to say that it happened by the direction of Venus rather than by chance?
And if we are to put no trust in false visions at other times I do not see what especial virtue there is in sleep to entitle its false visions to be taken as true.
On the other hand if nature had intended that sleepers should do what they dreamed, persons on going to bed would always have to be tied, otherwise they would commit more follies in their dreams than any madman ever did.
"And if, because of their unreality, we are to have no faith in the visions of the insane, I do not understand why we place any confidence in dreams, which are far more confused.
Is it because the insane do not tell their delusions to interpreters of visions while dreamers do?
I ask you this: suppose I wished to read, write, or sing, or to play on the lute, or to solve some problem in geometry, physics, or logic, must I wait for a dream, or must I depend upon the peculiar knowledge which each of these several arts or sciences requires and without which none of them can be utilized or mastered?
No; and not even if I wanted to sail a ship, would I pilot it as I might have dreamed I should; for the punishment would be immediate.
What would be the sense in the sick seeking relief from an interpreter of dreams rather than from a physician?
Or do you think that Aesculapius and Serapis have the power to prescribe a cure for our bodily ills through the medium of a dream and that Neptune cannot aid pilots through the same means?
or think you that though Minerva will prescribe physic in a dream without the aid of a physician, yet that the Muses will not employ dreams to impart a knowledge of reading, writing, and of other arts?
If knowledge of a remedy for disease were conveyed by means of dreams, knowledge of the arts just mentioned would also be given by dreams.
But since knowledge of these arts is not so conveyed neither is the knowledge of medicine.
The theory that the medical art was imparted by means of dreams having been disproved, the basis of a belief in dreams is utterly destroyed.
"But, though the conclusion just stated is obvious, let us now look deeper into the question.
Surely you must assume, either that there is a Divine Power which, in planning for our good, gives us information by means of dreams; or that, because of some natural connexion and association the Greeks call it  interpreters of dreams know what sort of a dream is required to fit any situation and what sort of a result will follow any dream; or that neither of these suppositions is true, but that the usual result or consequence of every dream is known by a consistent system of rules based on long-continued observation.
In the first place, then, it must be understood that there is no divine power which creates dreams.
And indeed it is perfectly clear that none of the visions seen in dreams have their origin in the will of the gods; for the gods, for our sakes, would so interpose that we might be able to foresee the future.
"But how often, pray, do you find anyone who pays any attention to dreams or who understands or remembers them?
On the other hand, how many treat them with disdain, and regard a belief in them as the superstition of a weak and effeminate mind!
Moreover, why does God, in planning for the good of the human race, convey his warnings by means of dreams which men consider unworthy not only of worrying about, but even of remembering?
For it is impossible that God does not know how people generally regard dreams; and to do anything needlessly and without a cause is unworthy of a god and is inconsistent even with the habits of right-thinking men.
And hence, if most dreams are unnoticed and disregarded, either God is ignorant of that fact, or he does a vain thing in conveying information by means of dreams; but neither supposition accords with the nature of a god, therefore, it must be admitted that God conveys no information by means of dreams.
"I also ask, if God gives us these visions as forewarnings, why does he not give them to us when we are awake rather than when we are asleep?
For, whether our souls in sleep are impelled by some external and foreign force; or whether they are self-moved; or whether there is some other cause why, during sleep, we imagine ourselves seeing or hearing, or doing certain things whatever the cause, it would apply just as well when we are awake.
If the gods did send us warnings in our sleep and for our good they would do the same for us when we are awake, especially since, as Chrysippus says in replying to the Academicians, appearances seen when we are awake are much more distinct and trustworthy than those seen in dreams.
It would, therefore, have been more in keeping with the beneficence of gods, in consulting for our good, to send us clear visions in our waking moments rather than unintelligible ones in our dreams.
But since that is not the case, dreams ought not to be held divine.
And, further, what is the need of a method which, instead of being direct, is so circuitous and roundabout that we have to employ men to interpret our dreams?
And if it be true that God consults for our advantage he would say: 'Do this,' 'Don't do that,' and not give us visions when we are awake rather than when we are asleep.
"And further, would anybody dare to say that all dreams are true?
' Some dreams are true,' says Ennius, ' but not necessarily all.'
Pray how do you distinguish between the two?
What mark have the false and what the true?
And if God sends the true, whence come the false?
Surely if God sends the false ones too what is more untrustworthy than God?
Besides what is more stupid than to excite the souls of mortals with false and lying visions?
But if true visions are divine while the false and meaningless ones are from nature, what sort of caprice decided that God made the one and nature made the other, rather than that God made them all, which your school denies, or that nature made them all?
Since you deny that God made them all you must admit that nature made them all.
By 'nature,' in this connexion, I mean that force because of which the soul can never be stationary and free from motion and activity.
And when, because of the weariness of the body, the soul can use neither the limbs nor the senses, it lapses into varied and untrustworthy visions, which emanate from what Aristotle terms 'the clinging remnants of the soul's waking acts and thoughts.'
These 'remnants,' when aroused, sometimes produce strange types of dreams.
Now if some of these dreams are true and others false, I should like very much to know by what mark they may be distinguished.
If there is none, why should we listen to your interpreters?
But if there is one, I am eager for them to tell me what it is, but they will grow confused when I ask and will not answer.
"The question now arises as to which is the more probable: do the immortal gods, who are of surpassing excellence in all things, constantly flit about, not only the beds, but even the lowly pallets of mortals, wherever they may be, and when they find someone snoring, throw at him dark and twisted visions, which scare him from his sleep and which he carries in the morning to a dream-expert to unravel?
or does nature bring it to pass that the ever-active soul sees in sleep phantoms of what it saw when the body was awake?
Which is more consonant with philosophy: to explain these apparitions by the superstitious theories of fortune-telling hags, or by an explanation based on natural causes?
But even if it were possible to draw trustworthy inferences from dreams, it could not be done by those who profess to have that power; for their fraternity is composed of the most shallow and the most ignorant of men.
Yet your Stoics assert that no one can be a diviner unless he is a ' wise man.'
"Chrysippus, indeed, defines divination in these words: 'The power to see, understand, and explain premonitory signs given to men by the gods.'
'Its duty,' he goes on to say, 'is to know in advance the disposition of the gods towards men, the manner in which that disposition is shown and by what means the gods may be propitiated and their threatened ills averted.'
And this same philosopher defines the interpretation of dreams thus: ' It is the power to understand and explain the visions sent by the gods to men in sleep.'
Then, if that be true, will just ordinary shrewdness meet these requirements, or rather is there not need of surpassing intelligence and absolutely perfect learning?
But I have never seen such a man.
"Therefore, even if I granted your contention as to the existence of divination and this I will never do still, you must realize that it would be impossible for us to find a diviner.
Then what do the gods mean by sending us in our dreams visions which we cannot understand ourselves and which we cannot find anybody to interpret for us?
If the gods send us these unintelligible and inexplicable dream-messages they are acting as Carthaginians and Spaniards would if they were to address our Senate in their own vernacular without the aid of an interpreter.
Besides, what purpose is served by dark and enigmatic dreams?
Surely the gods ought to want us to understand the advice they give us for our good.
'Oh!' but you retort,' Are poets and natural philosophers never obscure?'
Indeed they are: Euphorion is even too obscure; but Homer is not.
Which of them, pray, is the better poet?
Heraclitus is very obscure; Democritus is not so in the least:
then are they to be compared?
But you give me advice and for my good in words that I cannot understand.
Then why do you advise me at all?
That's like a doctor ordering a patient to take A bloodless, earth-engendered thing that crawls And bears its habitation on its back, instead of saying in common, every-day speech, 'a snail.'
Amphion, in a play by Pacuvius, speaks to the Athenians of a creature as Four-footed, of stature short; rough, shy, and slow; Fierce-eyed, with tiny head and serpent's neck; When disembowelled and deprived of life, It lives for ever in melodious song.
His meaning being too obscure the Athenians replied: Speak plainer, else we cannot understand.
Whereupon he described it in a single word: 'a tortoise.'
Couldn't you have said so at first, you cithara-player?
"A diviner was consulted by a man who had dreamed that he saw an egg hanging from the bed-cords of the bed in his sleeping-room the story is from Chrysippus On Dreams and the diviner answered, 'A treasure is buried under your bed.'
The man dug, found a quantity of gold surrounded with silver and sent the diviner as much of the silver as he thought fit.
The diviner then inquired, 'Do I get none of the yolk?
' For, in his view, the yolk meant gold, the white of the egg, silver.
Now, did no one else ever dream of an egg?
If so, then why did this fellow, whoever he was, alone find a treasure by dreaming of an egg?
What a lot of poor devils there are, deserving of divine assistance, who never were instructed by a dream how to find a treasure!
Furthermore, why was this man given so obscure an intimation as that contained in the fancied resemblance between an egg and a treasure, instead of being as plainly directed as Simonides was when he was bidden not to go on board the ship?
My conclusion is that obscure messages by means of dreams are utterly inconsistent with the dignity of gods.
"Let us now consider dreams that are clear and direct, like the dream of the man who was killed by the innkeeper at Megara; or like that of Simonides who was warned by the man he had buried not to sail; and also like Alexander's dream, which, to my surprise, my dear Quintus, you passed by without notice:
Alexander's intimate friend, Ptolemaeus, had been struck in battle by a poisoned arrow and was at the point of death from his wound and suffering the most excruciating agony; Alexander, while sitting by the bedside of his friend, fell fast asleep.
Thereupon, so the story goes, he dreamed that the pet serpent of his mother Olympias appeared to him carrying a root in its mouth and, at the same time, gave him the name of a place close by where it said the root grew.
This root, the serpent told him, was of such great virtue that it would effect the speedy cure of Ptolemaeus.
As soon as Alexander awoke he related his dream to his friends and men were sent to find the root.
It is said that when the root was found it worked the cure not only of Ptolemaeus, but also of many soldiers who had been wounded by the same kind of arrow.
"You, too, have drawn on history for dreams, a number of which you told.
You spoke, for example, of the dreams of the mother of Phalaris, of Cyrus the Elder, of the mother of Dionysius, of the Carthaginians Hamilcar and Hannibal, and of Publius Decius.
You mentioned that much-spoken-of dream about the slave who opened the votive games, also the dream of Gaius Gracchus and the recent one of Caecilia, the daughter of Balearicus.
But these are other people's dreams and hence we know nothing about them and some of them are fabrications perhaps.
For who stands sponsor for them?
And what have we to say of our own dreams?
Of your dream of me and of my horse emerging from the river and appearing on the bank? and of my dream of Marius, attended by his laurelled fasces, ordering me to be conducted to his monument?
"All dreams, my dear Quintus, have one explanation and, in heaven's name, let us see that it is not set at naught by superstition and perversity.
Now what Marius do you think it was I saw?
His 'likeness' or 'phantom,' I suppose at least that is what Democritus thinks.
Whence did the 'phantom' come?
He would have it that 'phantoms ' emanate from material bodies and from actual forms.
Then, it was the body of Marius from which my ' phantom' came?
' No,' says Democritus, ' but from his body that was.'
So that 'phantom' of Marius was pursuing me to the plains of Atina?
' Oh, but the universe is full of "phantoms"; no picture of anything can be formed in the mind except as the result of the impact of "phantoms."
'Then are these 'phantoms' of yours so obedient to our beck and call that they come the instant we summon them?
And is this true even of the 'phantoms' of things that do not exist?
For what is there so unreal and unheard of that we cannot form a mental picture of it?
We even shape things which we have never seen as the sites of towns and the faces of men.
Then, by your theory, when I think of the walls of Babylon or of the face of Homer, some 'phantom' of what I have in mind 'strikes upon my brain'!
Hence it is possible for us to know everything we wish to know, since there is nothing of which we cannot think.
Therefore no 'phantoms from the outside steal in upon our souls in sleep; nor do 'phantoms ' stream forth at all.
In fact I never knew anybody who could say nothing with more ponderous gravity than Democritus.
"The soul is of such a force and nature that, when we are awake, it is active, not because of any extraneous impulse, but because of its own inherent power of self-motion and a certain incredible swiftness.
When the soul is supported by the bodily members and by the five senses its powers of perception, thought, and apprehension are more trustworthy.
But when these physical aids are removed and the body is inert in sleep, the soul then moves of itself.
And so, in that state, visions flit about it, actions occur and it seems to hear and say many things.
When the soul itself is weakened and relaxed many such sights and sounds, you may be sure, are seen and heard in all manner of confusion and diversity.
Then especially do the 'remnants' of our waking thoughts and deeds move and stir within the soul.
For example, in the time of my banishment Marius was often in my mind as I recalled with what great fortitude and courage he had borne his own heavy misfortunes,
and this I think is the reason why I dreamed about him.
"As for your dream, it occurred while you were thinking and worrying about me and then you had the vision of me as I suddenly arose from the river.
For in the souls of us both were 'traces of our waking thoughts,' but with some added features, of course:
as, for example, my dreaming of Marius's monument and your dreaming that the horse on which I rode sank with me and then reappeared.
But do you suppose that there ever would have been any old woman crazy enough to believe in dreams, if by some lucky accident or chance they had not come true sometimes?
But let us consider Alexander's dream of the talking serpent.
The story may be true and it may be wholly false.
In either case it is no miracle; for he did not hear the serpent speak, but thought he heard it and, strangest thing of all, he thought it spoke while it held the root in its mouth!
But nothing seems strange to a man when he is dreaming.
Now, if Alexander ever had such a vivid and trustworthy dream as this, I want to ask why he never had another one like it and why other men have not had many of the same kind?
As for me, except for that dream about Marius, I really never had one that I can recall.
Think then how many nights in my long life I have spent in vain!
Moreover, at the present time, owing to the interruption of my public labours, I have ceased my nocturnal studies, and (contrary to my former practice) I have added afternoon naps.
Yet despite all this time spent in sleep I have not received a single prophecy in a dream, certainly not one about the great events now going on.
Indeed, I never seem to be dreaming more than when I see the magistrates in the forum and the Senate in its chamber.
"Coming now to the second branch of the present topic, is there some such natural connecting link, which, as I said before, the Greeks call , that the finding of a treasure must be deduced from dreaming of an egg?
Of course physicians, from certain symptoms, know the incipiency and progress of a disease; and it is claimed that from some kinds of dreams they even can gather certain indications as to a patient's health, as whether the internal humours of the body are excessive or deficient.
But what natural bond of union is there between dreams, on the one hand, and treasures, legacies, public office, victory and many other things of the same kind, on the other?
A person, it is said, while dreaming of coition, ejected gravel.
In this case I can see a relation between the dream and the result; for the vision presented to the sleeper was such as to make it clear that what happened was due to natural causes and not to the delusion.
But by what law of nature did Simonides receive that vision which forbade him to sail?
or what was the connexion between the laws of nature and the dream of Alcibiades in which, according to history, shortly before his death, he seemed to be enveloped in the cloak of his mistress?
Later, when his body had been cast out and was lying unburied and universally neglected, his mistress covered it with her mantle.
Then do you say that this dream was united by some natural tie with the fate that befell Alcibiades, or did chance cause both the apparition and the subsequent event?
"Furthermore, is it not a fact that the conjectures of the interpreters of dreams give evidence of their authors' sagacity rather than afford any proof of a relation between dreams and the laws of nature?
For example, a runner, who was planning to set out for the Olympic games, dreamed that he was riding in a chariot drawn by four horses.
In the morning he went to consult an interpreter, who said to him, 'You will win, for that is implied in the speed and strength of horses.'
Later the runner went to Antipho, who said, 'You are bound to lose, for do you not see that four ran ahead of you?
And behold another runner! for the books of Chrysippus and Antipater are full of such dreams but to return to the runner: he reported to an interpreter that he had dreamed of having been changed into an eagle.
The interpreter said to him, 'You are the victor, for no bird flies faster than the eagle.'
This runner also consulted Antipho: 'Simpleton,' said the latter, 'don't you see that you are beaten?
For that bird is always pursuing and driving other birds before it and itself is always last.'
"A married woman who was desirous of a child and was in doubt whether she was pregnant or not, dreamed that her womb had been sealed.
She referred.
He told her that since her womb was sealed conception was impossible.
But another interpreter said, 'You are pregnant, for it is not customary to seal that which is empty.'
Then what is the dream-interpreter's art other than a means of using one's wits to deceive?
And those incidents which I have given and the numberless ones collected by the Stoics prove nothing whatever except the shrewdness of men who employ slight analogies in order to draw now one inference and now another.
There are certain indications from the condition of the pulse and breath and from many other symptoms in sickness by means of which physicians foretell the course of a disease.
When pilots see cuttle-fish leaping or dolphins betaking themselves to a haven they believe that a storm is at hand.
In such cases signs are given which are traceable to natural causes and explicable by reason, but that is far from true of the dreams spoken of a little while ago.
"In our consideration of dreams we come now to the remaining point left for discussion, which is your contention that 'by long-continued observation of dreams and by recording the results an art has been evolved.'
Really?
Then, it is possible, I suppose, to ' observe ' dreams?
If so, how?
For they are of infinite variety and there is no imaginable thing too absurd, too involved, or too abnormal for us to dream about it.
How, then, is it possible for us either to remember this countless and ever-changing mass of visions or to observe and record the subsequent results?
Astronomers have recorded the movements of the planets and thereby have discovered an orderly course of the stars, not thought of before.
But tell me, if you can, what is the orderly course of dreams and what is the harmonious relation between them and subsequent events?
And by what means can the true be distinguished from the false, in view of the fact that the same dreams have certain consequences for one person and different consequences for another and seeing also that even for the same individual the same dream is not always followed by the same result?
As a rule we do not believe a liar even when he tells the truth, but, to my surprise, if one dream turns out to be true, your Stoics do not withdraw their belief in the prophetic value of that one though it is only one out of many; rather, from the character of the one true dream, they establish the character of countless others that are false.
"Therefore, if God is not the creator of dreams; if there is no connexion between them and the laws of nature; and finally, if, by means of observation no art of divining can be found in them, it follows that absolutely no reliance can be placed in dreams.
This becomes especially evident when we consider that those who have the dreams deduce no prophecies from them; that those who interpret them depend upon conjecture and not upon nature; that in the course of the almost countless ages, chance has worked more miracles through all other agencies than through the agency of dreams; and, finally, that nothing is more uncertain than conjecture, which may be led not only into varying, but sometimes even into contradictory, conclusions.
"Then let dreams, as a means of divination, be rejected along with the rest.
Speaking frankly, superstition, which is widespread among the nations, has taken advantage of human weakness to cast its spell over the mind of almost every man.
This same view was stated in my treatise On the Nature of the Gods; and to prove the correctness of that view has been the chief aim of the present discussion.
For I thought that I should be rendering a great service both to myself and to my countrymen if I could tear this superstition up by the roots.
But I want it distinctly understood that the destruction of superstition does not mean the destruction of religion.
For I consider it the part of wisdom to preserve the institutions of our forefathers by retaining their sacred rites and ceremonies.
Furthermore, the celestial order and the beauty of the universe compel me to confess that there is some excellent and eternal Being, who deserves the respect and homage of men.
"Wherefore, just as it is a duty to extend the influence of true religion, which is closely associated with the knowledge of nature, so it is a duty to weed out every root of superstition.
For superstition is ever at your heels to urge you on; it follows you at every turn.
It is with you when you listen to a prophet, or an omen; when you offer sacrifices or watch the flight of birds; when you consult an astrologer or a soothsayer; when it thunders or lightens or there is a bolt from on high; or when some so-called prodigy is born or is made.
And since necessarily some of these signs are nearly always being given, no one who believes in them can ever remain in a tranquil state of mind.
"Sleep is regarded as a refuge from every toil and care;
but it is actually made the fruitful source of worry and fear.
In fact dreams would be less regarded on their own account and would be viewed with greater indifference had they not been taken under the guardianship of philosophers not philosophers of the meaner sort, but those of the keenest wit, competent to see what follows logically and what does not men who are considered well-nigh perfect and infallible.
Indeed, if their arrogance had not been resisted by Carneades, it is probable that by this time they would have been adjudged the only philosophers.
While most of my war of words has been with these men, it is not because I hold them in especial contempt, but on the contrary, it is because they seem to me to defend their own views with the greatest acuteness and skill; Moreover, it is characteristic of the Academy to put forward no conclusions of its own, but to approve those which seem to approach nearest to the truth; to compare arguments; to draw forth all that may be said in behalf of any opinion; and, without asserting any authority of its own, to leave the judgement of the inquirer wholly free.
That same method, which by the way we inherited from Socrates, I shall, if agreeable to you, my dear Quintus, follow as often as possible in our future discussions."
Nothing could please me better, Quintus replied.
When this was said, we arose.
My dear son Marcus, you have now been studying a full year under Cratippus, and that too in Athens, and you should be fully equipped with the practical precepts and the principles of philosophy; so much at least one might expect from the pre-eminence not only of your teacher but also of the city; the former is able to enrich you with learning, the latter to supply you with models.
Nevertheless, just as I for my own improvement have always combined Greek and Latin studies and I have done this not only in the study of philosophy but also in the practice of oratory so I recommend that you should do the same, so that you may have equal command of both languages.
And it is in this very direction that I have, if I mistake not, rendered a great service to our countrymen, so that not only those who are unacquainted with Greek literature but even the cultured consider that they have gained much both in oratorical power and in mental training.
You will, therefore, learn from the foremost of present-day philosophers, and you will go on learning as long as you wish; and your wish ought to continue as long as you are not dissatisfied with the progress you are making.
For all that, if you will read my philosophical books, you will be helped; my philosophy is not very different from that of the Peripatetics (for both they and I claim to be followers of Socrates and Plato).
As to the conclusions you may reach, I leave that to your own judgment (for I would put no hindrance in your way), but by reading my philosophical writings you will be sure to render your mastery of the Latin language more complete.
But I would by no means have you think that this is said boastfully.
For there are many to whom I yield precedence in knowledge of philosophy; but if I lay claim to the orator's peculiar ability to speak with propriety, clearness, elegance, I think my claim is in a measure justified, for I have spent my life in that profession.
And therefore, my dear Cicero, I cordially recommend you to read carefully not only my orations but also these books of mine on philosophy, which are now about as extensive.
For while the orations exhibit a more vigorous style, yet the unimpassioned, restrained style of my philosophical productions is also worth cultivating.
Moreover, for the same man to succeed in both departments, both in the forensic style and in that of calm philosophic discussion has not, I observe, been the good fortune of any one of the Greeks so far, unless, perhaps, Demetrius of Phalerum can be reckoned in that number a clever reasoner, indeed, and, though rather a spiritless orator, he is yet charming, so that you can recognize in him the disciple of Theophrastus.
But let others judge how much I have accomplished in each pursuit; I have at least attempted both.
I believe, of course, that if Plato had been willing to devote himself to forensic oratory, he could have spoken with the greatest eloquence and power; and that if Demosthenes had continued the studies he pursued with Plato and had wished to expound his views, he could have done so with elegance and brilliancy.
I feel the same way about Aristotle and Isocrates, each of whom, engrossed in his own profession, undervalued that of the other.
But since I have decided to write you a little now (and a great deal by and by), I wish, if possible, to begin with a matter most suited at once to your years and to my position.
Although philosophy offers many problems, both important and useful, that have been fully and carefully discussed by philosophers, those teachings which have been handed down on the subject of moral duties seem to have the widest practical application.
For no phase of life, whether public or private, whether in business or in the home, whether one is working on what concerns oneself alone or dealing with another, can be without its moral duty; on the discharge of such duties depends all that is morally right, and on their neglect all that is morally wrong in life.
Moreover, the subject of this inquiry is the common property of all philosophers; for who would presume to call himself a philosopher, if he did not inculcate any lessons of duty?
But there are some schools that distort all notions of duty by the theories they propose touching the supreme good and the supreme evil.
For he who posits the supreme good as having no connection with virtue and measures it not by a moral standard but by his own interests if he should be consistent and not rather at times over-ruled by his better nature, he could value neither friendship nor justice nor generosity; and brave he surely cannot possibly be that counts pain the supreme evil, nor temperate he that holds pleasure to be the supreme good.
Although these truths are so self-evident that the subject does not call for discussion, still I have discussed it in another connection.
If, therefore, these schools should claim to be consistent, they could not say anything about duty; and no fixed, invariable, natural rules of duty can be posited except by those who say that moral goodness is worth seeking solely or chiefly for its own sake.
Accordingly, the teaching of ethics is the peculiar right of the Stoics, the Academicians, and the Peripatetics; for the theories of Aristo, Pyrrho, and Erillus have been long since rejected; and yet they would have the right to discuss duty if they had left us any power of choosing between things, so that there might be a way of finding out what duty is.
I shall, therefore, at this time and in this investigation follow chiefly the Stoics, not as a translator, but, as is my custom, I shall at my own option and discretion draw from those sources in such measure and in such manner as shall suit my purpose.
Since, therefore, the whole discussion is to be on the subject of duty, I should like at the outset to define what duty is, as, to my surprise, Panaetius has failed to do.
For every systematic development of any subject ought to begin with a definition, so that everyone may understand what the discussion is about.
Every treatise on duty has two parts: one, dealing with the doctrine of the supreme good; the other, with the practical rules by which daily life in all its bearings may be regulated.
The following questions are illustrative of the first part: whether all duties are absolute; whether one duty is more important than another; and so on.
But as regards special duties for which positive rules are laid down, though they are affected by the doctrine of the supreme good, still the fact is not so obvious, because they seem rather to look to the regulation of everyday life;
and it is these special duties that I propose to treat at length in the following books.
And yet there is still another classification of duties:
we distinguish between "mean" duty, so called, and "absolute" duty.
Absolute duty we may, I presume, call "right," for the Greeks call it , while the ordinary duty they call .
And the meaning of those terms they fix thus: whatever is right they define as "absolute" duty, but "mean" duty, they say, is duty for the performance of which an adequate reason may be rendered.
The consideration necessary to determine conduct is, therefore, as Panaetius thinks, a threefold one:
first, people question whether the contemplated act is morally right or morally wrong; and in such deliberation their minds are often led to widely divergent conclusions.
And then they examine and consider the question whether the action contemplated is or is not conducive to comfort and happiness in life, to the command of means and wealth, to influence, and to power, by which they may be able to help themselves and their friends; this whole matter turns upon a question of expediency.
The third type of question arises when that which seems to be expedient seems to conflict with that which is morally right; for when expediency seems to be pulling one way, while moral right seems to be calling back in the opposite direction, the result is that the mind is distracted in its inquiry and brings to it the irresolution that is born of deliberation.
Although omission is a most serious defect in classification, two points have been overlooked in the foregoing: for we usually consider not only whether an action is morally right or morally wrong, but also, when a choice of two morally right courses is offered, which one is morally better; and likewise, when a choice of two expedients is offered, which one is more expedient.
Thus the question which Panaetius thought threefold ought, we find, to be divided into five parts.
First, therefore, we must discuss the moral and that, under two sub-heads; secondly, in the same manner, the expedient; and finally, the cases where they must be weighed against each other.
First of all, Nature has endowed every species of living creature with the instinct of self-preservation, of avoiding what seems likely to cause injury to life or limb, and of procuring and providing everything needful for life food, shelter, and the like.
A common property of all creatures is also the reproductive instinct (the purpose of which is the propagation of the species) and also a certain amount of concern for their offspring.
But the most marked difference between man and beast is this: the beast, just as far as it is moved by the senses and with very little perception of past or future, adapts itself to that alone which is present at the moment; while man because he is endowed with reason, by which he comprehends the chain of consequences, perceives the causes of things, understands the relation of cause to effect and of effect to cause, draws analogies, and connects and associates the present and the future easily surveys the course of his whole life and makes the necessary preparations for its conduct.
Nature likewise by the power of reason associates man with man in the common bonds of speech and life; she implants in him above all, I may say, a strangely tender love for his offspring.
She also prompts men to meet in companies, to form public assemblies and to take part in them themselves; and she further dictates, as a consequence of this, the effort on man's part to provide a store of things that minister to his comforts and wants and not for himself alone, but for his wife and children and the others whom he holds dear and for whom he ought to provide;
and this responsibility also stimulates his courage and makes it stronger for the active duties of life.
Above all, the search after truth and its eager pursuit are peculiar to man.
And so, when we have leisure from the demands of business cares, we are eager to see, to hear, to learn something new, and we esteem a desire to know the secrets or wonders of creation as indispensable to a happy life.
Thus we come to understand that what is true, simple, and genuine appeals most strongly to a man's nature.
To this passion for discovering truth there is added a hungering, as it were, for independence, so that a mind well-moulded by Nature is unwilling to be subject to anybody save one who gives rules of conduct or is a teacher of truth or who, for the general good, rules according to justice and law.
From this attitude come greatness of soul and a sense of superiority to worldly conditions.
And it is no mean manifestation of Nature and Reason that man is the only animal that has a feeling for order, for propriety, for moderation in word and deed.
And so no other animal has a sense of beauty, loveliness, harmony in the visible world; and Nature and Reason, extending the analogy of this from the world of sense to the world of spirit, find that beauty, consistency, order are far more to be maintained in thought and deed, and the same Nature and Reason are careful to do nothing in an improper or unmanly fashion, and in every thought and deed to do or think nothing capriciously.
It is from these elements that is forged and fashioned that moral goodness which is the subject of this inquiry something that, even though it be not generally ennobled, is still worthy of all honour; and by its own nature, we correctly maintain, it merits praise, even though it be praised by none.
You see here, Marcus, my son, the very form and as it were the face of Moral Goodness; "and if," as Plato says, "it could be seen with the physical eye, it would awaken a marvellous love of wisdom."
But all that is morally right rises from some one of four sources: it is concerned either with the full perception and intelligent development of the true; or () with the conservation of organized society, with rendering to every man his due, and with the faithful discharge of obligations assumed; or () with the greatness and strength of a noble and invincible spirit; or () with the orderliness and moderation of everything that is said and done, wherein consist temperance and self-control.
Although these four are connected and interwoven, still it is in each one considered singly that certain definite kinds of moral duties have their origin: in that category, for instance, which was designated first in our division and in which we place wisdom and prudence, belong the search after truth and its discovery; and this is the peculiar province of that virtue.
For the more clearly anyone observes the most essential truth in any given case and the more quickly and accurately he can see and explain the reasons for it, the more understanding and wise he is generally esteemed, and justly so.
So, then, it is truth that is, as it were, the stuff with which this virtue has to deal and on which it employs itself.
Before the three remaining virtues, on the other hand, is set the task of providing and maintaining those things on which the practical business of life depends, so that the relations of man to man in human society may be conserved, and that largeness and nobility of soul may be revealed not only in increasing one's resources and acquiring advantages for one's self and one's family but far more in rising superior to these very things.
But orderly behaviour and consistency of demeanour and self-control and the like have their sphere in that department of things in which a certain amount of physical exertion, and not mental activity merely, is required.
For if we bring a certain amount of propriety and order into the transactions of daily life, we shall be conserving moral rectitude and moral dignity.
Now, of the four divisions which we have made of the essential idea of moral goodness, the first, consisting in the knowledge of truth, touches human nature most closely.
For we are all attracted and drawn to a zeal for learning and knowing; and we think it glorious to excel therein, while we count it base and immoral to fall into error, to wander from the truth, to be ignorant, to be led astray.
In this pursuit, which is both natural and morally right, two errors are to be avoided: first, we must not treat the unknown as known and too readily accept it; and he who wishes to avoid this error (as all should do) will devote both time and attention to the weighing of evidence.
The other error is that some people devote too much industry and too deep study to matters that are obscure and difficult and useless as well.
If these errors are successfully avoided, all the labour and pains expended upon problems that are morally right and worth the solving will be fully rewarded.
Such a worker in the field of astronomy, for example, was Gaius Sulpicius, of whom we have heard; in mathematics, Sextus Pompey, whom I have known personally; in dialectics, many; in civil law, still more.
All these professions are occupied with the search after truth; but to be drawn by study away from active life is contrary to moral duty.
For the whole glory of virtue is in activity; activity, however, may often be interrupted, and many opportunities for returning to study are opened.
Besides, the working of the mind, which is never at rest, can keep us busy in the pursuit of knowledge even without conscious effort on our part.
Moreover, all our thought and mental activity will be devoted either to planning for things that are morally right and that conduce to a good and happy life, or to the pursuits of science and learning.
With this we close the discussion of the first source of duty.
Of the three remaining divisions, the most extensive in its application is the principle by which society and what we may call its "common bonds" are maintained.
Of this again there are two divisions justice, in which is the crowning glory of the virtues and on the basis of which men are called "good men"; and, close akin to justice, charity, which may also be called kindness or generosity.
The first office of justice is to keep one man from doing harm to another, unless provoked by wrong; and the next is to lead men to use common possessions for the common interests, private property for their own.
There is, however, no such thing as private ownership established by nature, but property becomes private either through long occupancy (as in the case of those who long ago settled in unoccupied territory) or through conquest (as in the case of those who took it in war) or by due process of law, bargain, or purchase, or by allotment.
On this principle the lands of Arpinum are said to belong to the Arpinates, the Tusculan lands to the Tusculans; and similar is the assignment of private property.
Therefore, inasmuch as in each case some of those things which by nature had been common property became the property of individuals, each one should retain possession of that which has fallen to his lot; and if anyone appropriates to himself anything beyond that, he will be violating the laws of human society.
But since, as Plato has admirably expressed it, we are not born for ourselves alone, but our country claims a share of our being, and our friends a share; and since, as the Stoics hold, everything that the earth produces is created for man's use; and as men, too, are born for the sake of men, that they may be able mutually to help one another;
in this direction we ought to follow Nature as our guide, to contribute to the general good by an interchange of acts of kindness, by giving and receiving, and thus by our skill, our industry, and our talents to cement human society more closely together, man to man.
The foundation of justice, moreover, is good faith that is, truth and fidelity to promises and agreements.
And therefore we may follow the Stoics, who diligently investigate the etymology of words; and we may accept their statement that "good faith" is so called because what is promised is "made good," although some may find this derivation rather farfetched.
There are, on the other hand, two kinds of injustice the one, on the part of those who inflict wrong, the other on the part of those who, when they can, do not shield from wrong those upon whom it is being inflicted.
For he who, under the influence of anger or some other passion, wrongfully assaults another seems, as it were, to be laying violent hands upon a comrade; but he who does not prevent or oppose wrong, if he can, is just as guilty of wrong as if he deserted his parents or his friends or his country.
Then, too, those very wrongs which people try to inflict on purpose to injure are often the result of fear: that is, he who premeditates injuring another is afraid that, if he does not do so, he may himself be made to suffer some hurt.
But, for the most part, people are led to wrong-doing in order to secure some personal end; in this vice, avarice is generally the controlling motive.
Again, men seek riches partly to supply the needs of life, partly to secure the enjoyment of pleasure.
With those who cherish higher ambitions, the desire for wealth is entertained with a view to power and influence and the means of bestowing favours; Marcus Crassus, for example, not long since declared that no amount of wealth was enough for the man who aspired to be the foremost citizen of the state, unless with the income from it he could maintain an army.
Fine establishments and the comforts of life in elegance and abundance also afford pleasure, and the desire to secure it gives rise to the insatiable thirst for wealth.
Still, I do not mean to find fault with the accumulation of property, provided it hurts nobody, but unjust acquisition of it is always to be avoided.
The great majority of people, however, when they fall a prey to ambition for either military or civil authority, are carried away by it so completely that they quite lose sight of the claims of justice.
For Ennius says: There is no fellowship inviolate,
No faith is kept, when kingship is concerned;
and the truth of his words has an uncommonly wide application.
For whenever a situation is of such a nature that not more than one can hold preeminence in it, competition for it usually becomes so keen that it is an extremely difficult matter to maintain a "fellowship inviolate."
We saw this proved but now in the effrontery of Gaius Caesar, who, to gain that sovereign power which by a depraved imagination he had conceived in his fancy, trod underfoot all laws of gods and men.
But the trouble about this matter is that it is in the greatest souls and in the most brilliant geniuses that we usually find ambitions for civil and military authority, for power, and for glory, springing up;
and therefore we must be the more heedful not to go wrong in that direction.
But in any case of injustice it makes a vast deal of difference whether the wrong is done as a result of some impulse of passion, which is usually brief and transient, or whether it is committed wilfully and with premeditation;
for offences that come through some sudden impulse are less culpable than those committed designedly and with malice aforethought.
But enough has been said on the subject of inflicting injury.
The motives for failure to prevent injury and so for slighting duty are likely to be various: people either are reluctant to incur enmity or trouble or expense; or through indifference, indolence, or incompetence, or through some preoccupation or selfinterest they are so absorbed that they suffer those to be neglected whom it is their duty to protect.
And so there is reason to fear that what Plato declares of the philosophers may be inadequate, when he says that they are just because they are busied with the pursuit of truth and because they despise and count as naught that which most men eagerly seek and for which they are prone to do battle against each other to the death.
For they secure one sort of justice, to be sure, in that they do no positive wrong to anyone, but they fall into the opposite injustice; for hampered by their pursuit of learning they leave to their fate those whom they ought to defend.
And so, Plato thinks, they will not even assume their civic duties except under compulsion.
But in fact it were better that they should assume them of their own accord; for an action intrinsically right is just only on condition that it is voluntary.
There are some also who, either from zeal in attending to their own business or through some sort of aversion to their fellow-men, claim that they are occupied solely with their own affairs, without seeming to themselves to be doing anyone any injury.
But while they steer clear of the one kind of injustice, they fall into the other: they are traitors to social life, for they contribute to it none of their interest, none of their effort, none of their means.
Now since we have set forth the two kinds of injustice and assigned the motives that lead to each, and since we have previously established the principles by which justice is constituted, we shall be in a position easily to decide what our duty on each occasion is, unless we are extremely self-centred; for indeed it is not an easy matter to be really concerned with other people's affairs;
and yet in Terence's play, we know, Chremes "thinks that nothing that concerns man is foreign to him."
Nevertheless, when things turn out for our own good or ill, we realize it more fully and feel it more deeply than when the same things happen to others and we see them only, as it were, in the far distance; and for this reason we judge their case differently from our own.
It is, therefore, an excellent rule that they give who bid us not to do a thing, when there is a doubt whether it be right or wrong;
for righteousness shines with a brilliance of its own, but doubt is a sign that we are thinking of a possible wrong.
But occasions often arise, when those duties which seem most becoming to the just man and to the "good man," as we call him, undergo a change and take on a contrary aspect.
It may, for example, not be a duty to restore a trust or to fulfil a promise, and it may become right and proper sometimes to evade and not to observe what truth and honour would usually demand.
For we may well be guided by those fundamental principles of justice which I laid down at the outset: first, that no harm be done to anyone; second, that the common interests be conserved.
When these are modified under changed circumstances, moral duty also undergoes a change, and it does not always remain the same.
For a given promise or agreement may turn out in such a way that its performance will prove detrimental either to the one to whom the promise has been made or to the one who has made it.
If, for example, Neptune, in the drama, had not carried out his promise to Theseus, Theseus would not have lost his son Hippolytus; for, as the story runs, of the three wishes that Neptune had promised to grant him the third was this: in a fit of anger he prayed for the death of Hippolytus, and the granting of this prayer plunged him into unspeakable grief.
Promises are, therefore, not to be kept, if the keeping of them is to prove harmful to those to whom you have made them; and, if the fulfilment of a promise should do more harm to you than good to him to whom you have made it, it is no violation of moral duty to give the greater good precedence over the lesser good.
For example, if you have made an appointment with anyone to appear as his advocate in court, and if in the meantime your son should fall dangerously ill, it would be no breach of your moral duty to fail in what you agreed to do; nay, rather, he to whom your promise was given would have a false conception of duty, if he should complain that he had been deserted in his time of need.
Further than this, who fails to see that those promises are not binding which are extorted by intimidation or which we make when misled by false pretences?
Such obligations are annulled in most cases by the praetor's edict in equity, in some cases by the laws.
Injustice often arises also through chicanery, that is, through an over-subtle and even fraudulent construction of the law.
This it is that gave rise to the now familiar saw, "More law, less justice."
Through such interpretation also a great deal of wrong is committed in transactions between state and state; thus, when a truce had been made with the enemy for thirty days, a famous general went to ravaging their fields by night, because, he said, the truce stipulated "days," not nights.
Not even our own countryman's action is to be commended, if what is told of Quintus Fabius Labeo is true or whoever it was (for I have no authority but hearsay): appointed by the Senate to arbitrate a boundary dispute between Nola and Naples, he took up the case and interviewed both parties separately, asking them not to proceed in a covetous or grasping spirit, but to make some concession rather than claim some accession.
When each party had agreed to this, there was a considerable strip of territory left between them.
And so he set the boundary of each city as each had severally agreed; and the tract in between he awarded to the Roman People.
Now that is swindling, not arbitration.
And therefore such sharp practice is under all circumstances to be avoided.
Again, there are certain duties that we owe even to those who have wronged us.
For there is a limit to retribution and to punishment; or rather, I am inclined to think, it is sufficient that the aggressor should be brought to repent of his wrong-doing, in order that he may not repeat the offence and that others may be deterred from doing wrong.
Then, too, in the case of a state in its external relations, the rights of war must be strictly observed.
For since there are two ways of settling a dispute: first, by discussion; second, by physical force; and since the former is characteristic of man, the latter of the brute, we must resort to force only in case we may not avail ourselves of discussion.
The only excuse, therefore, for going to war is that we may live in peace unharmed; and when the victory is won, we should spare those who have not been blood-thirsty and barbarous in their warfare.
For instance, our forefathers actually admitted to full rights of citizenship the Tusculans, Aequians, Volscians, Sabines, and Hernicians, but they razed Carthage and Numantia to the ground.
I wish they had not destroyed Corinth; but I believe they had some special reason for what they did its convenient situation, probably and feared that its very location might some day furnish a temptation to renew the war.
In my opinion, at least, we should always strive to secure a peace that shall not admit of guile.
And if my advice had been heeded on this point, we should still have at least some sort of constitutional government, if not the best in the world, whereas, as it is, we have none at all.
Not only must we show consideration for those whom we have conquered by force of arms but we must also ensure protection to those who lay down their arms and throw themselves upon the mercy of our generals, even though the battering-ram has hammered at their walls.
And among our countrymen justice has been observed so conscientiously in this direction, that those who have given promise of protection to states or nations subdued in war become, after the custom of our forefathers, the patrons of those states.
As for war, humane laws touching it are drawn up in the fetial code of the Roman People under all the guarantees of religion;
and from this it may be gathered that no war is just, unless it is entered upon after an official demand for satisfaction has been submitted or warning has been given and a formal declaration made.
Popilius was general in command of a province.
In his army Cato's son was serving on his first campaign.
When Popilius decided to disband one of his legions, he discharged also young Cato, who was serving in that same legion.
But when the young man out of love for the service stayed on in the field, his father wrote to Popilius to say that if he let him stay in the army, he should swear him into service with a new oath of allegiance, for in view of the voidance of his former oath he could not legally fight the foe.
So extremely scrupulous was the observance of the laws in regard to the conduct of war.
There is extant, too, a letter of the elder Marcus Cato to his son Marcus, in which he writes that he has heard that the youth has been discharged by the consul, when he was serving in Macedonia in the war with Perseus.
He warns him, therefore, to be careful not to go into battle; for, he says, the man who is not legally a soldier has no right to be fighting the foe.
This also I observe that he who would properly have been called "a fighting enemy" was called "a guest", thus relieving the ugliness of the fact by a softened expression;
for "enemy" meant to our ancestors what we now call "stranger".
This is proved by the usage in the Twelve Tables: "Or a day fixed for trial with a stranger", And again: "Right of ownership is inalienable for ever in dealings with a stranger".
What can exceed such charity, when he with whom one is at war is called by so gentle a name?
And yet long lapse of time has given that word a harsher meaning: for it has lost its signification of "stranger" and has taken on the technical connotation of "an enemy under arms."
But when a war is fought out for supremacy and when glory is the object of war, it must still not fail to start from the same motives which I said a moment ago were the only righteous grounds for going to war.
But those wars which have glory for their end must be carried on with less bitterness.
For we contend, for example, with a fellow-citizen in one way, if he is a personal enemy, in another, if he is a rival: with the rival it is a struggle for office and position, with the enemy for life and honour.
So with the Celtiberians and the Cimbrians we fought as with deadly enemies, not to determine which should be supreme, but which should survive; but with the Latins, Sabines, Samnites, Carthaginians, and Pyrrhus we fought for supremacy.
The Carthaginians violated treaties; Hannibal was cruel; the others were more merciful.
From Pyrrhus we have this famous speech on the exchange of prisoners:
"Gold will I none, nor price shall ye give; for I ask none;
Come, let us not be chaff'rers of war, but warriors embattled.
Nay; let us venture our lives, and the sword, not gold, weigh the outcome.
Make we the trial by valour in arms and see if Dame Fortune Wills it that ye shall prevail or I, or what be her judgment.
Hear thou, too, this word, good Fabricius: whose valour soever Spared hath been by the fortune of war-their freedom I grant them.
Take them back to their homes; the great gods' blessings attend you.
A right kingly sentiment this and worthy a scion of the Aeacidae.
Again, if under stress of circumstances individuals have made any promise to the enemy, they are bound to keep their word even then.
For instance, in the First Punic War, when Regulus was taken prisoner by the Carthaginians, he was sent to Rome on parole to negotiate an exchange of prisoners; he came and, in the first place, it was he that made the motion in the Senate that the prisoners should not be restored; and in the second place, when his relatives and friends would have kept him back, he chose to return to a death by torture rather than prove false to his promise, though given to an enemy.
And again in the Second Punic War, after the Battle of Cannae, Hannibal sent to Rome ten Roman captives bound by an oath to return to him, if they did not succeed in ransoming his prisoners; and as long as any one of them lived, the censors kept them all degraded and disfranchised, because they were guilty of perjury in not returning.
And they punished in like manner the one who had incurred guilt by an evasion of his oath: with Hannibal's permission this man left the camp and returned a little later on the pretext that he had forgotten something or other; and then, when he left the camp the second time, he claimed that he was released from the obligation of his oath; and so he was, according to the letter of it, but not according to the spirit.
In the matter of a promise one must always consider the meaning and not the mere words.
Our forefathers have given us another striking example of justice toward an enemy: when a deserter from Pyrrhus promised the Senate to administer poison to the king and thus work his death, the Senate and Gaius Fabricius delivered the deserter up to Pyrrhus.
Thus they stamped with their disapproval the treacherous murder even of an enemy who was at once powerful, unprovoked, aggressive, and successful.
With this I will close my discussion of the duties connected with war.
But let us remember that we must have regard for justice even towards the humblest.
Now the humblest station and the poorest fortune are those of slaves; and they give us no bad rule who bid us treat our slaves as we should our employees: they must be required to work; they must be given their dues.
While wrong may be done, then, in either of two ways, that is, by force or by fraud, both are bestial: fraud seems to belong to the cunning fox, force to the lion; both are wholly unworthy of man, but fraud is the more contemptible.
But of all forms of injustice, none is more flagrant than that of the hypocrite who, at the very moment when he is most false, makes it his business to appear virtuous.
This must conclude our discussion of justice.
Next in order, as outlined above, let us speak of kindness and generosity.
Nothing appeals more to the best in human nature than this, but it calls for the exercise of caution in many particulars: we must, in the first place, see to it that our act of kindness shall not prove an injury either to the object of our beneficence or to others; in the second place, that it shall not be beyond our means; and finally, that it shall be proportioned to the worthiness of the recipient; for this is the corner-stone of justice; and by the standard of justice all acts of kindness must be measured.
For those who confer a harmful favour upon someone whom they seemingly wish to help are to be accounted not generous benefactors but dangerous sycophants; and likewise those who injure one man, in order to be generous to another, are guilty of the same injustice as if they diverted to their own accounts the property of their neighbours.
Now, there are many and especially those who are ambitious for eminence and glory who rob one to enrich another; and they expect to be thought generous towards their friends, if they put them in the way of getting rich, no matter by what means.
Such conduct, however, is so remote from moral duty that nothing can be more completely opposed to duty.
We must, therefore, take care to indulge only in such liberality as will help our friends and hurt no one.
The conveyance of property by Lucius Sulla and Gaius Caesar from its rightful owners to the hands of strangers should, for that reason, not be regarded as generosity; for nothing is generous, if it is not at the same time just.
The second point for the exercise of caution was that our beneficence should not exceed our means; for those who wish to be more open-handed than their circumstances permit are guilty of two faults: first, they do wrong to their next of kin; for they transfer to strangers property which would more justly be placed at their service or bequeathed to them.
And second, such generosity too often engenders a passion for plundering and misappropriating property, in order to supply the means for making large gifts.
We may also observe that a great many people do many things that seem to be inspired more by a spirit of ostentation than by heart-felt kindness; for such people are not really generous but are rather influenced by a sort of ambition to make a show of being open-handed.
Such a pose is nearer akin to hypocrisy than to generosity or moral goodness.
The third rule laid down was that in acts of kindness we should weigh with discrimination the worthiness of the object of our benevolence; we should take into consideration his moral character, his attitude toward us, the intimacy of his relations to us, and our common social ties, as well as the services he has hitherto rendered in our interest.
It is to be desired that all these considerations should be combined in the same person; if they are not, then the more numerous and the more important considerations must have the greater weight.
Now, the men we live with are not perfect and ideally wise, but men who do very well, if there be found in them but the semblance of virtue.
I therefore think that this is to be taken for granted, that no one should be entirely neglected who shows any trace of virtue; but the more a man is endowed with these finer virtues temperance, self-control, and that very justice about which so much has already been said the more he deserves to be favoured.
I do not mention fortitude, for a courageous spirit in a man who has not attained perfection and ideal wisdom is generally too impetuous; it is those other virtues that seem more particularly to mark the good man.
So much in regard to the character of the object of our beneficence.
But as to the affection which anyone may have for us, it is the first demand of duty that we do most for him who loves us most; but we should measure affection, not like youngsters, by the ardour of its passion, but rather by its strength and constancy.
But if there shall be obligations already incurred, so that kindness is not to begin with us, but to be requited, still greater diligence, it seems, is called for; for no duty is more imperative than that of proving one's gratitude.
But if, as Hesiod bids, one is to repay with interest, if possible, what one has borrowed in time of need, what, pray, ought we to do when challenged by an unsought kindness?
Shall we not imitate the fruitful fields, which return more than they receive?
For if we do not hesitate to confer favours upon those who we hope will be of help to us, how ought we to deal with those who have already helped us?
For generosity is of two kinds: doing a kindness and requiting one.
Whether we do the kindness or not is optional; but to fail to requite one is not allowable to a good man, provided he can make the requital without violating the rights of others.
Furthermore, we must make some discrimination between favours received; for, as a matter of course, the greater the favour, the greater is the obligation.
But in deciding this we must above all give due weight to the spirit, the devotion, the affection, that prompted the favour.
For many people often do favours impulsively for everybody without discrimination, prompted by a morbid sort of benevolence or by a sudden impulse of the heart, shifting as the wind.
Such acts of generosity are not to be so highly esteemed as those which are performed with judgment, deliberation, and mature consideration.
But in bestowing a kindness, as well as in making a requital, the first rule of duty requires us other things being equal to lend assistance preferably to people in proportion to their individual need.
Most people adopt the contrary course: they put themselves most eagerly at the service of the one from whom they hope to receive the greatest favours, even though he has no need of their help.
The interests of society, however, and its common bonds will be best conserved, if kindness be shown to each individual in proportion to the closeness of his relationship.
But it seems we must trace back to their ultimate sources the principles of fellowship and society that Nature has established among men.
The first principle is that which is found in the connection subsisting between all the members of the human race; and that bond of connection is reason and speech, which by the processes of teaching and learning, of communicating, discussing, and reasoning associate men together and unite them in a sort of natural fraternity.
In no other particular are we farther removed from the nature of beasts; for we admit that they may have courage (horses and lions, for example); but we do not admit that they have justice, equity, and goodness; for they are not endowed with reason or speech.
This, then, is the most comprehensive bond that unites together men as men and all to all; and under it the common right to all things that Nature has produced for the common use of man is to be maintained, with the understanding that, while everything assigned as private property by the statutes and by civil law shall be so held as prescribed by those same laws, everything else shall be regarded in the light indicated by the Greek proverb: "Amongst friends all things in common."
Furthermore, we find the common property of all men in things of the sort defined by Ennius; and, though restricted by him to one instance, the principle may be applied very generally:
"Who kindly sets a wand'rer on his way Does e'en as if he lit another's lamp by his:
No less shines his, when he his friend's hath lit.
In this example he effectively teaches us all to bestow even upon a stranger what it costs us nothing to give.
On this principle we have the following maxims:
Deny no one the water that flows by;
Let anyone who will take fire from our fire;
Honest counsel give to one who is in doubt; for such acts are useful to the recipient and cause the giver no loss.
We should, therefore, adopt these principles and always be contributing something to the common weal.
But since the resources of individuals are limited and the number of the needy is infinite, this spirit of universal liberality must be regulated according to that test of Ennius "No less shines his" in order that we may continue to have the means for being generous to our friends.
Then, too, there are a great many degrees of closeness or remoteness in human society.
To proceed beyond the universal bond of our common humanity, there is the closer one of belonging to the same people, tribe, and tongue, by which men are very closely bound together;
it is a still closer relation to be citizens of the same city-state; for fellow-citizens have much in common forum, temples, colonnades, streets, statutes laws; Courts, rights of suffrage, to say nothing of social and friendly circles and diverse business relations with many.
But a sill closer social union exists between kindred.
Starting with that infinite bond of union of the human race in general, the conception is now confined to a small and narrow circle.
For since the reproductive instinct is by Nature's gift the common possession of all living creatures, the first bond of union is that between husband and wife; the next, that between parents and children; then we find one home, with everything in common.
And this is the foundation of civil government, the nursery, as it were, of the state.
Then follow the bonds between brothers and sisters, and next those of first and then of second cousins; and when they can no longer be sheltered under one roof, they go out into other homes, as into colonies.
Then follow between these, in turn, marriages and connections by marriage, and from these again a new stock of relations; and from this propagation and after-growth states have their beginnings.
The bonds of common blood hold men fast through good-will and affection;
for it means much to share in common the same family traditions, the same forms of domestic worship, and the same ancestral tombs.
But of all the bonds of fellowship, there is none more noble, none more powerful than when good men of congenial character are joined in intimate friendship; for really, if we discover in another that moral goodness on which I dwell so much, it attracts us and makes us friends to the one in whose character it seems to dwell.
And while every virtue attracts us and makes us love those who seem to possess it, still justice and generosity do so most of all.
Nothing, moreover, is more conducive to love and intimacy than compatibility of character in good men; for when two people have the same ideals and the same tastes, it is a natural consequence that each loves the other as himself; and the result is, as Pythagoras requires of ideal friendship, that several are united in one.
Another strong bond of fellowship is effected by mutual interchange of kind services; and as long as these kindnesses are mutual and acceptable, those between whom they are interchanged are united by the ties of an enduring intimacy.
But when with a rational spirit you have surveyed the whole field, there is no social relation among them all more close, none more dear than that which links each one of us with our country.
Parents are dear; dear are children, relatives, friends; but one native land embraces all our loves; and who that is true would hesitate to give his life for her, if by his death he could render her a service?
So much the more execrable are those monsters who have torn their fatherland to pieces with every form of outrage and who are and have been engaged in compassing her utter destruction.
Now, if a contrast and comparison were to be made to find out where most of our moral obligation is due, country would come first, and parents; for their services have laid us under the heaviest obligation;
next come children and the whole family, who look to us alone for support and can have no other protection;
finally, our kinsmen, with whom we live on good terms and with whom, for the most part, our lot is one.
All needful material assistance is, therefore, due first of all to those whom I have named; but intimate relationship of life and living, counsel, conversation, encouragement, comfort, and sometimes even reproof flourish best in friendships.
And that friendship is sweetest which is cemented by congeniality of character.
But in the performance of all these duties we shall have to consider what is most needful in each individual case and what each individual person can or cannot procure without our help.
In this way we shall find that the claims of social relationship, in its various degrees, are not identical with the dictates of circumstances; for there are obligations that are due to one individual rather than to another: for example, one would sooner assist a neighbour in gathering his harvest than either a brother or a friend; but should it be a case in court, one would defend a kinsman and a friend rather than a neighbour.
Such questions as these must, therefore, be taken into consideration in every act of moral duty , in order to become good calculators of duty, able by adding and subtracting to strike a balance correctly and find out just how much is due to each individual.
But as neither physicians nor generals nor orators can achieve any signal success without experience and practice, no matter how well they may understand the theory of their profession, so the rules for the discharge of duty are formulated, it is true, as I am doing now, but a matter of such importance requires experience also and practice.
This must close our discussion of the ways in which moral goodness, on which duty depends, is developed from those principles which hold good in human society.
We must realize, however, that while we have set down four cardinal virtues from which as sources moral rectitude and moral duty emanate, that achievement is most glorious in the eyes of the world which is won with a spirit great, exalted, and superior to the vicissitudes of earthly life.
And so, when we wish to hurl a taunt, the very first to rise to our lips is, if possible, something like this:
"For ye, young men, show a womanish soul, yon maiden a man's;
" and this: "Thou son of Salmacis, win spoils that cost nor sweat nor blood.
When, on the other hand, we wish to pay a compliment, we somehow or other praise in more eloquent strain the brave and noble work of some great soul.
Hence there is an open field for orators on the subjects of Marathon, Salamis, Plataea, Thermopylae, and Leuctra, and hence our own Cocles, the Decii, Gnaeus and Publius Scipio, Marcus Marcellus, and countless others, and, above all, the Roman People as a nation are celebrated for greatness of spirit.
Their passion for military glory, moreover, is shown in the fact that we see their statues usually in soldier's garb.
But if the exaltation of spirit seen in times of danger and toil is devoid of justice and fights for selfish ends instead of for the common good, it is a vice; for not only has it no element of virtue, but its nature is barbarous and revolting to all our finer feelings.
The Stoics, therefore, correctly define courage as "that virtue which champions the cause of right."
Accordingly, no one has attained to true glory who has gained a reputation for courage by treachery and cunning; for nothing that lacks justice can be morally right.
This, then, is a fine saying of Plato's: "Not only must all knowledge that is divorced from justice be called cunning rather than wisdom," he says, "but even the courage that is prompt to face danger, if it is inspired not by public spirit, but by its own selfish purposes, should have the name of effrontery rather than of courage."
And so we demand that men who are courageous and high-souled shall at the same time be good and straightforward, lovers of truth, and foes to deception; for these qualities are the centre and soul of justice.
But the mischief is that from this exaltation and greatness of spirit spring all too readily self-will and excessive lust for power.
For just as Plato tells us that the whole national character of the Spartans was on fire with passion for victory, so, in the same way, the more notable a man is for his greatness of spirit, the more ambitious he is to be the foremost citizen, or, I should say rather, to be sole ruler.
But when one begins to aspire to pre-eminence, it is difficult to preserve that spirit of fairness which is absolutely essential to justice.
The result is that such men do not allow themselves to be constrained either by argument or by any public and lawful authority; but they only too often prove to be bribers and agitators in public life, seeking to obtain supreme power and to be superiors through force rather than equals through justice.
But the greater the difficulty, the greater the glory; for no occasion arises that can excuse a man for being guilty of injustice.
So then, not those who do injury but those who prevent it are to be considered brave and courageous.
Moreover, true and philosophic greatness of spirit regards the moral goodness to which Nature most aspires as consisting in deeds, not in fame, and prefers to be first in reality rather than in name.
And we must approve this view; for he who depends upon the caprice of the ignorant rabble cannot be numbered among the great.
Then, too, the higher a man's ambition, the more easily he is tempted to acts of injustice by his desire for fame.
We are now, to be sure, on very slippery ground; for scarcely can the man be found who has passed through trials and encountered dangers and does not then wish for glory as a reward for his achievements.
The soul that is altogether courageous and great is marked above all by two characteristics: one of these is indifference to outward circumstances; for such a person cherishes the conviction that nothing but moral goodness and propriety deserves to be either admired or wished for or striven after, and that he ought not to be subject to any man or any passion or any accident of fortune.
The second characteristic is that, when the soul is disciplined in the way above mentioned, one should do deeds not only great and in the highest degree useful, but extremely arduous and laborious and fraught with danger both to life and to many things that make life worth living.
All the glory and greatness and, I may add, all the usefulness of these two characteristics of courage are centred in the latter; the rational cause that makes men great, in the former.
For it is the former that contains the element that makes souls pre-eminent and indifferent to worldly fortune.
And this quality is distinguished by two criteria: if one account moral rectitude as the only good; and if one be free from all passion.
For we must agree that it takes a brave and heroic soul to hold as slight what most people think grand and glorious, and to disregard it from fixed and settled principles.
And it requires strength of character and great singleness of purpose to bear what seems painful, as it comes to pass in many and various forms in human life, and to bear it so unflinchingly as not to be shaken in the least from one's natural state of the dignity of a philosopher.
Moreover, it would be inconsistent for the man who is not overcome by fear to be overcome by desire, or for the man who has shown himself invincible to toil to be conquered by pleasure.
We must, therefore, not only avoid the latter, but also beware of ambition for wealth; for there is nothing so characteristic of narrowness and littleness of soul as the love of riches; and there is nothing more honourable and noble than to be indifferent to money, if one does not possess it, and to devote it to beneficence and liberality, if one does possess it.
As I said before, we must also beware of ambition for glory; for it robs us of liberty, and in defence of liberty a high-souled man should stake everything.
And one ought not to seek military authority; nay, rather it ought sometimes to be declined, sometimes to be resigned.
Again, we must keep ourselves free from every disturbing emotion, not only from desire and fear, but also from excessive pain and pleasure, and from anger, so that we may enjoy that calm of soul and freedom from care which bring both moral stability and dignity of character.
But there have been many and still are many who, while pursuing that calm of soul of which I speak, have withdrawn from civic duty and taken refuge in retirement.
Among such have been found the most famous and by far the foremost philosophers and certain other earnest, thoughtful men who could not endure the conduct of either the people or their leaders; some of them, too, lived in the country and found their pleasure in the management of their private estates.
Such men have had the same aims as kings to suffer no want, to be subject to no authority, to enjoy their liberty, that is, in its essence, to live just as they please.
So, while this desire is common to men of political ambitions and men of retirement, of whom I have just spoken, the one class think they can attain their end if they secure large means; the other, if they are content with the little they have
And, in this matter, neither way of thinking is altogether to be condemned; but the life of retirement is easier and safer and at the same time less burdensome or troublesome to others, while the career of those who apply themselves to statecraft and to conducting great enterprises is more profitable to mankind and contributes more to their own greatness and renown.
So perhaps those men of extraordinary genius who have devoted themselves to learning must be excused for not taking part in public affairs; likewise, those who from ill-health or for some still more valid reason have retired from the service of the state and left to others the opportunity and the glory of its administration.
But if those who have no such excuse profess a scorn for civil and military offices, which most people admire, I think that this should be set down not to their credit but to their discredit; for in so far as they care little, as they say, for glory and count it as naught, it is difficult not to sympathize with their attitude; in reality, however, they seem to dread the toil and trouble and also, perhaps, the discredit and humiliation of political failure and defeat.
For there are people who in opposite circumstances do not act consistently: they have the utmost contempt for pleasure, but in pain they are too sensitive; they are indifferent to glory, but they are crushed by disgrace; and even in their inconsistency they show no great consistency.
But those whom Nature has endowed with the capacity for administering public affairs should put aside all hesitation, enter the race for public office, and take a hand in directing the government; for in no other way can a government be administered or greatness of spirit be made manifest.
Statesmen, too, no less than philosophers perhaps even more so should carry with them that greatness of spirit and indifference to outward circumstances to which I so often refer, together with calm of soul and freedom from care, if they are to be free from worries and lead a dignified and self-consistent life.
This is easier for the philosophers; as their life is less exposed to the assaults of fortune, their wants are fewer; and, if any misfortune overtakes them, their fall is not so disastrous.
Not without reason, therefore, are stronger emotions aroused in those who engage in public life than in those who live in retirement, and greater is their ambition for success; the more, therefore, do they need to enjoy greatness of spirit and freedom from annoying cares.
If anyone is entering public life, let him beware of thinking only of the honour that it brings; but let him be sure also that he has the ability to succeed.
At the same time, let him take care not to lose heart too readily through discouragement nor yet to be over-confident through ambition.
In a word, before undertaking any enterprise, careful preparation must be made.
Most people think that the achievements of war are more important than those of peace; but this opinion needs to be corrected.
For many men have sought occasions for war from the mere ambition for fame.
This is notably the case with men of great spirit and natural ability, and it is the more likely to happen, if they are adapted to a soldier's life and fond of warfare.
But if we will face the facts, we shall find that there have been many instances of achievement in peace more important and no less renowned than in war.
However highly Themistocles, for example, may be extolled and deservedly and however much more illustrious his name may be than Solon's, and however much Salamis may be cited as witness of his most glorious victory, a victory glorified above Solon's statesmanship in instituting the Areopagus yet Solon's achievement is not to be accounted less illustrious than his.
For Themistocles's victory served the state once and only once; while Solon's work will be of service for ever.
For through his legislation the laws of the Athenians and the institutions of their fathers are maintained.
And while Themistocles could not readily point to any instance in which he himself had rendered assistance to the Areopagus, the Areopagus might with justice assert that Themistocles had received assistance from it;
for the war was directed by the counsels of that senate which Solon had created.
The same may be said of Pausanias and Lysander.
Although it is thought that it was by their achievements that Sparta gained her supremacy, yet these are not even remotely to be compared with the legislation and discipline of Lycurgus.
Nay, rather, it was due to these that Pausanias and Lysander had armies so brave and so well disciplined.
For my own part, I do not consider that Marcus Scaurus was inferior to Gaius Marius, when I was a lad, or Quintus Catulus to Gnaeus Pompey, when I was engaged in public life.
For arms are of little value in the field unless there is wise counsel at home.
So, too, Africanus, though a great man and a soldier of extraordinary ability, did no greater service to the state by destroying Numantia than was done at the same time by Publius Nasica, though not then clothed with official authority, by removing Tiberius Gracchus.
This deed does not, to be sure, belong wholly to the domain of civil affairs; it partakes of the nature of war also, since it was effected by violence; but it was, for all that, executed as a political measure without the help of an army.
The whole truth, however, is in this verse, against which, I am told, the malicious and envious are wont to rail:
Not to mention other instances, did not arms yield to the toga, when I was at the helm of state?
For never was the republic in more serious peril, never was peace more profound.
Thus, as the result of my counsels and my vigilance, their weapons slipped suddenly from the hands of the most desperate traitors dropped to the ground of their own accord!
What achievement in war, then, was ever so great?
What triumph can be compared with that?
For I may boast to you, my son Marcus; for to you belong the inheritance of that glory of mine and the duty of imitating my deeds.
And it was to me, too, that Gnaeus Pompey, a hero crowned with the honours of war, paid this tribute in the hearing of many, when he said that his third triumph would have been gained in vain, if he were not to have through my services to the state a place in which to celebrate it.
There are, therefore, instances of civic courage that are not inferior to the courage of the soldier.
Nay, the former calls for even greater energy and greater devotion than the latter.
That moral goodness which we look for in a lofty, high-minded spirit is secured, of course, by moral, not by physical, strength.
And yet the body must be trained and so disciplined that it can obey the dictates of judgment and reason in attending to business and in enduring toil.
But that moral goodness which is our theme depends wholly upon the thought and attention given to it by the mind.
And, in this way, the men who in a civil capacity direct the affairs of the nation render no less important service than they who conduct its wars: by their statesmanship oftentimes wars are either averted or terminated; sometimes also they are declared.
Upon Marcus Cato's counsel, for example, the Third Punic War was undertaken, and in its conduct his influence was dominant, even after he was dead.
And so diplomacy in the friendly settlement of controversies is more desirable than courage in settling them on the battlefield; but we must be careful not to take that course merely for the sake of avoiding war rather than for the sake of public expediency.
War, however, should be undertaken in such a way as to make it evident that it has no other object than to secure peace.
But it takes a brave and resolute spirit not to be disconcerted in times of difficulty or ruffled and thrown off one's feet, as the saying is, but to keep one's presence of mind and one's self-possession and not to swerve from the path of reason.
Now all this requires great personal courage; but it calls also for great intellectual ability by reflection to anticipate the future, to discover some time in advance what may happen whether for good or for ill, and what must be done in any possible event, and never to be reduced to having to say "I had not thought of that."
These are the activities that mark a spirit strong, high, and self-reliant in its prudence and wisdom.
But to mix rashly in the fray and to fight hand to hand with the enemy is but a barbarous and brutish kind of business.
Yet when the stress of circumstances demands it, we must gird on the sword and prefer death to slavery and disgrace.
As to destroying and plundering cities, let me say that great care should be taken that nothing be done in reckless cruelty or wantonness.
And it is a great man's duty in troublous times to single out the guilty for punishment, to spare the many, and in every turn of fortune to hold to a true and honourable course.
For whereas there are many, as I have said before, who place the achievements of war above those of peace, so one may find many to whom adventurous, hot-headed counsels seem more brilliant and more impressive than calm and well-considered measures.
We must, of course, never be guilty of seeming cowardly and craven in our avoidance of danger; but we must also beware of exposing ourselves to danger needlessly.
Nothing can be more foolhardy than that.
Accordingly, in encountering danger we should do as doctors do in their practice: in light cases of illness they give mild treatment; in cases of dangerous sickness they are compelled to apply hazardous and even desperate remedies.
It is, therefore, only a madman who, in a calm, would pray for a storm; a wise man's way is, when the storm does come, to withstand it with all the means at his command, and especially, when the advantages to be expected in case of a successful issue are greater than the hazards of the struggle.
The dangers attending great affairs of state fall sometimes upon those who undertake them, sometimes upon the state.
In carrying out such enterprises, some run the risk of losing their lives, others their reputation and the good-will of their fellow-citizens.
It is our duty, then, to be more ready to endanger our own than the public welfare and to hazard honour and glory more readily than other advantages.
Many, on the other hand, have been found who were ready to pour out not only their money but their lives for their country and yet would not consent to make even the slightest sacrifice of personal glory even though the interests of their country demanded it.
For example, when Callicratidas, as Spartan admiral in the Peloponnesian War, had won many signal successes, he spoiled everything at the end by refusing to listen to the proposal of those who thought he ought to withdraw his fleet from the Arginusae and not to risk an engagement with the Athenians.
His answer to them was that "the Spartans could build another fleet, if they lost that one, but he could not retreat without dishonour to himself."
And yet what he did dealt only a slight blow to Sparta; there was another which proved disastrous, when Cleombrotus in fear of criticism recklessly went into battle against Epaminondas.
In consequence of that, the Spartan power fell.
How much better was the conduct of Quintus Maximus!
Of him Ennius says: "One man and he alone restored our state by delaying.
Not in the least did fame with him take precedence of safety;
Therefore now does his glory shine bright, and it grows ever brighter.
This sort of offence must be avoided no less in political life.
For there are men who for fear of giving offence do not dare to express their honest opinion, no matter how excellent.
Those who propose to take charge of the affairs of government should not fail to remember two of Plato's rules: first, to keep the good of the people so clearly in view that regardless of their own interests they will make their every action conform to that; second, to care for the welfare of the whole body politic and not in serving the interests of some one party to betray the rest.
For the administration of the government, like the office of a trustee, must be conducted for the benefit of those entrusted to one's care, not of those to whom it is entrusted.
Now, those who care for the interests of a part of the citizens and neglect another part, introduce into the civil service a dangerous element dissension and party strife.
The result is that some are found to be loyal supporters of the democratic, others of the aristocratic party, and few of the nation as a whole.
As a result of this party spirit bitter strife arose at Athens, and in our own country not only dissensions but also disastrous civil wars broke out.
All this the citizen who is patriotic, brave, and worthy of a leading place in the state will shun with abhorrence; he will dedicate himself unreservedly to his country, without aiming at influence or power for himself; and he will devote himself to the state in its entirety in such a way as to further the interests of all.
Besides, he will not expose anyone to hatred or disrepute by groundless charges, but he will surely cleave to justice and honour so closely that he will submit to any loss, however heavy, rather than be untrue to them, and will face death itself rather than renounce them.
A most wretched custom, assuredly, is our electioneering and scrambling for office.
Concerning this also we find a fine thought in Plato: "Those who compete against one another," he says, "to see which of two candidates shall administer the government, are like sailors quarrelling as to which one of them shall do the steering."
And he likewise lays down the rule that we should regard only those as adversaries who take up arms against the state, not those who strive to have the government administered according to their convictions.
This was the spirit of the disagreement between Publius Africanus and Quintus Metellus: there was in it no trace of rancour.
Neither must we listen to those who think that one should indulge in violent anger against one's political enemies and imagine that such is the attitude of a great-spirited, brave man.
For nothing is more commendable, nothing more becoming in a pre-eminently great man than courtesy and forbearance.
Indeed, in a free people, where all enjoy equal rights before the law, we must school ourselves to affability and what is called "mental poise"; for if we are irritated when people intrude upon us at unseasonable hours or make unreasonable requests, we shall develop a sour, churlish temper, prejudicial to ourselves and offensive to others.
And yet gentleness of spirit and forbearance are to be commended only with the understanding that strictness may be exercised for the good of the state; for without that, the government cannot be well administered.
On the other hand, if punishment or correction must be administered, it need not be insulting; it ought to have regard to the welfare of the state, not to the personal satisfaction of the man who administers the punishment or reproof.
We should take care also that the punishment shall not be out of proportion to the offence, and that some shall not be chastised for the same fault for which others are not even called to account.
In administering punishment it is above all necessary to allow no trace of anger.
For if anyone proceeds in a passion to inflict punishment, he will never observe that happy mean which lies between excess and defect.
This doctrine of the mean is approved by the Peripatetics and wisely approved, if only they did not speak in praise of anger and tell us that it is a gift bestowed on us by Nature for a good purpose.
But, in reality, anger is in every circumstance to be eradicated; and it is to be desired that they who administer the government should be like the laws, which are led to inflict punishment not by wrath but by justice.
Again, when fortune smiles and the stream of life flows according to our wishes, let us diligently avoid all arrogance, haughtiness, and pride.
For it is as much a sign of weakness to give way to one's feelings in success as it is in adversity.
But it is a fine thing to keep an unruffled temper, an unchanging mien, and the same cast of countenance in every condition of life; this, history tells us, was characteristic of Socrates and no less of Gaius Laelius.
Philip, king of Macedon, I observe, however surpassed by his son in achievements and fame, was superior to him in affability and refinement.
Philip, accordingly, was always great; Alexander, often infamously bad.
There seems to be sound advice, therefore, in this word of warning: "The higher we are placed, the more humbly should we walk."
Panaetius tells us that Africanus, his pupil and friend, used to say: "As, when horses have become mettlesome and unmanageable on account of their frequent participation in battles, their owners put them in the hands of trainers to make them more tractable; so men, who through prosperity have become restive and over self-confident, ought to be put into the training-ring, so to speak, of reason and learning, that they may be brought to comprehend the frailty of human affairs and the fickleness of fortune."
The greater our prosperity, moreover, the more should we seek the counsel of friends, and the greater the heed that should be given to their advice.
Under such circumstances also we must beware of lending an ear to sycophants or allowing them to impose upon us with their flattery.
For it is easy in this way to deceive ourselves, since we thus come to think ourselves duly entitled to praise; and to this frame of mind a thousand delusions may be traced, when men are puffed up with conceit and expose themselves to ignominy and ridicule by committing the most egregious blunders.
So much for this subject.
To revert to the original question we must decide that the most important activities, those most indicative of a great spirit, are performed by the men who direct the affairs of nations; for such public activities have the widest scope and touch the lives of the most people.
But even in the life of retirement there are and there have been many high-souled men who have been engaged in important inquiries or embarked on most important enterprises and yet kept themselves within the limits of their own affairs; or, taking a middle course between philosophers on the one hand and statesmen on the other, they were content with managing their own property not increasing it by any and every means nor debarring their kindred from the enjoyment of it, but rather, if ever there were need, sharing it with their friends and with the state.
Only let it, in the first place, be honestly acquired, by the use of no dishonest or fraudulent means; let it, in the second place, increase by wisdom, industry, and thrift; and, finally, let it be made available for the use of as many as possible (if only they are worthy) and be at the service of generosity and beneficence rather than of sensuality and excess.
By observing these rules, one may live in magnificence, dignity, and independence, and yet in honour, truth and charity toward all.
We have next to discuss the one remaining division of moral rectitude.
That is the one in which we find considerateness and self-control, which give, as it were, a sort of polish to life; it embraces also temperance, complete subjection of all the passions, and moderation in all things.
Under this head is further included what, in Latin, may be called decorum; for in Greek it is called .
Such is its essential nature, that it is inseparable from moral goodness;
for what is proper is morally right, and what is morally right is proper.
The nature of the difference between morality and propriety can be more easily felt than expressed.
For whatever propriety may be, it is manifested only when there is pre-existing moral rectitude.
And so, not only in this division of moral rectitude which we have now to discuss but also in the three preceding divisions, it is clearly brought out what propriety is.
For to employ reason and speech rationally, to do with careful consideration whatever one does, and in everything to discern the truth and to uphold it that is proper.
To be mistaken, on the other hand, to miss the truth, to fall into error, to be led astray that is as improper as to be deranged and lose one's mind.
And all things just are proper; all things unjust, like all things immoral, are improper.
The relation of propriety to fortitude is similar.
What is done in a manly and courageous spirit seems becoming to a man and proper; what is done in a contrary fashion is at once immoral and improper.
This propriety, therefore, of which I am speaking belongs to each division of moral rectitude; and its relation to the cardinal virtues is so close, that it is perfectly self-evident and does not require any abstruse process of reasoning to see it.
For there is a certain element of propriety perceptible in every act of moral rectitude; and this can be separated from virtue theoretically better than it can be practically.
As comeliness and beauty of person are inseparable from the notion of health, so this propriety of which we are speaking, while in fact completely blended with virtue, is mentally and theoretically distinguishable from it.
The classification of propriety, moreover, is twofold: we assume a general sort of propriety, which is found in moral goodness as a whole; then () there is another propriety, subordinate to this, which belongs to the several divisions of moral goodness.
The former is usually defined somewhat as follows: "Propriety is that which harmonizes with man's superiority in those respects in which his nature differs from that of the rest of the animal creation."
And they so define the special type of propriety which is subordinate to the general notion, that they represent it to be that propriety which harmonizes with Nature, in the sense that it manifestly embraces temperance and self-control, together with a certain deportment such as becomes a gentleman.
That this is the common acceptation of propriety we may infer from that propriety which poets aim to secure.
Concerning that, I have occasion to say more in another connection.
Now, we say that the poets observe propriety, when every word or action is in accord with each individual character.
For example, if Aeacus or Minos said: Let them hate, if only they fear,
or: "The father is himself his children's tomb, that would seem improper, because we are told that they were just men.
But when Atreus speaks those lines, they call forth applause; for the sentiment is in keeping with the character.
But it will rest with the poets to decide, according to the individual characters, what is proper for each; but to us Nature herself has assigned a character of surpassing excellence, far superior to that of all other living creatures, and in accordance with that we shall have to decide what propriety requires.
The poets will observe, therefore, amid a great variety of characters, what is suitable and proper for all even for the bad.
But to us Nature has assigned the roles of steadfastness, temperance, self-control, and considerateness of others; Nature also teaches us not to be careless in our behaviour towards our fellow-men.
Hence we may clearly see how wide is the application not only of that propriety which is essential to moral rectitude in general, but also of the special propriety which is displayed in each particular subdivision of virtue.
For, as physical beauty with harmonious symmetry of the limbs engages the attention and delights the eye, for the very reason that all the parts combine in harmony and grace, so this propriety, which shines out in our conduct, engages the approbation of our fellow-men by the order, consistency, and self-control it imposes upon every word and deed.
We should, therefore, in our dealings with people show what I may almost call reverence toward all men not only toward the men who are the best, but toward others as well.
For indifference to public opinion implies not merely self-sufficiency, but even total lack of principle.
There is, too, a difference between justice and considerateness in one's relations to one's fellow-men.
It is the function of justice not to do wrong to one's fellow-men; of considerateness, not to wound their feelings; and in this the essence of propriety is best seen.
With the foregoing exposition, I think it is clear what the nature is of what we term propriety.
Further, as to the duty which has its source in propriety, the first road on which it conducts us leads to harmony with Nature and the faithful observance of her laws.
If we follow Nature as our guide, we shall never go astray, but we shall be pursuing that which is in its nature clear-sighted and penetrating, that which is adapted to promote and strengthen society, and that which is strong and courageous.
But the very essence of propriety is found in the division of virtue which is now under discussion.
For it is only when they agree with Nature's laws that we should give our approval to the movements not only of the body, but still more of the spirit.
Now we find that the essential activity of the spirit is twofold: one force is appetite (that is, , in Greek), which impels a man this way and that; the other is reason, which teaches and explains what should be done and what should be left undone.
The result is that reason commands, appetite obeys.
Again, every action ought to be free from undue haste or carelessness; neither ought we to do anything for which we cannot assign a reasonable motive; for in these words we have practically a definition of duty.
The appetites, moreover, must be made to obey the reins of reason and neither allowed to run ahead of it nor from listlessness or indolence to lag behind; but people should enjoy calm of soul and be free from every sort of passion.
As a result strength of character and self-control will shine forth in all their lustre.
For when appetites overstep their bounds and, galloping away, so to speak, whether in desire or aversion, are not well held in hand by reason, they clearly overleap all bound and measure; for they throw obedience off and leave it behind and refuse to obey the reins of reason, to which they are subject by Nature's laws.
And not only minds but bodies as well are disordered by such appetites.
We need only to look at the faces of men in a rage or under the influence of some passion or fear or beside themselves with extravagant joy: in every instance their features, voices, motions, attitudes undergo a change.
From all this to return to our sketch of duty we see that all the appetites must be controlled and calmed and that we must take infinite pains not to do anything from mere impulse or at random, without due consideration and care.
For Nature has not brought us into the world to act as if we were created for play or jest, but rather for earnestness and for some more serious and important pursuits.
We may, of course, indulge in sport and jest, but in the same way as we enjoy sleep or other relaxations, and only when we have satisfied the claims of our earnest, serious tasks.
Further than that, the manner of jesting itself ought not to be extravagant or immoderate, but refined and witty.
For as we do not grant our children unlimited licence to play, but only such freedom as is not incompatible with good conduct, so even in our jesting let the light of a pure character shine forth.
There are, generally speaking, two sorts of jest: the one, coarse, rude, vicious, indecent; the other, refined, polite, clever, witty.
With this latter sort not only our own Plautus and the Old Comedy of Athens, but also the books of Socratic philosophy abound; and we have many witty sayings of many men like those collected by old Cato under the title of Bons Mots (or Apophthegms).
So the distinction between the elegant and the vulgar jest is an easy matter:
the one kind, if well timed (for instance, in hours of mental relaxation), is becoming to the most dignified person; the other is unfit for any gentleman, if the subject is indecent and the words obscene.
Then, too, certain bounds must be observed in our amusements and we must be careful not to carry things too far and, swept away by our passions, lapse into some shameful excess.
Our Campus, however, and the amusements of the chase are examples of wholesome recreation.
But it is essential to every inquiry about duty that we keep before our eyes how far superior man is by nature to cattle and other beasts: they have no thought except for sensual pleasure and this they are impelled by every instinct to seek; but man's mind is nurtured by study and meditation; he is always either investigating or doing, and he is captivated by the pleasure of seeing and hearing.
Nay, even if a man is more than ordinarily inclined to sensual pleasures, provided, of course, that he be not quite on a level with the beasts of the field (for some people are men only in name, not in fact) if, I say, he is a little too susceptible to the attractions of pleasure, he hides the fact, however much he may be caught in its toils, and for very shame conceals his appetite.
From this we see that sensual pleasure is quite unworthy of the dignity of man and that we ought to despise it and cast it from us; but if someone should be found who sets some value upon sensual gratification, he must keep strictly within the limits of moderate indulgence.
One's physical comforts and wants, therefore, should be ordered according to the demands of health and strength, not according to the calls of pleasure.
And if we will only bear in mind the superiority and dignity of our nature, we shall realize how wrong it is to abandon ourselves to excess and to live in luxury and voluptuousness, and how right it is to live in thrift, selfdenial, simplicity, and sobriety.
We must realize also that we are invested by Nature with two characters, as it were: one of these is universal, arising from the fact of our being all alike endowed with reason and with that superiority which lifts us above the brute.
From this all morality and propriety are derived, and upon it depends the rational method of ascertaining our duty.
The other character is the one that is assigned to individuals in particular.
In the matter of physical endowment there are great differences; some, we see, excel in speed for the race, others in strength for wrestling; so in point of personal appearance, some have stateliness, others comeliness.
Diversities of character are greater still.
Lucius Crassus and Lucius Philippus had a large fund of wit; Gaius Caesar, Lucius's son, had a still richer fund and employed it with more studied purpose.
Contemporary with them, Marcus Scaurus and Marcus Drusus, the younger, were examples of unusual seriousness; Gaius Laelius, of unbounded jollity; while his intimate friend, Scipio, cherished more serious ideals and lived a more austere life.
Among the Greeks, history tells us, Socrates was fascinating and witty, a genial conversationalist; he was what the Greeks call  in every conversation, pretending to need information and professing admiration for the wisdom of his companion.
Pythagoras and Pericles, on the other hand, reached the heights of influence and power without any seasoning of mirthfulness.
We read that Hannibal, among the Carthaginian generals, and Quintus Maximus, among our own, were shrewd and ready at concealing their plans, covering up their tracks, disguising their movements, laying stratagems, forestalling the enemy's designs.
In these qualities the Greeks rank Themistocles and Jason of Pherae above all others.
Especially crafty and shrewd was the device of Solon, who, to make his own life safer and at the same time to do a considerably larger service for his country, feigned insanity.
Then there are others, quite different from these, straightforward and open, who think that nothing should be done by underhand means or treachery.
They are lovers of truth, haters of fraud.
There are others still who will stoop to anything, truckle to anybody, if only they may gain their ends.
Such, we saw, were Sulla and Marcus Crassus.
The most crafty and most persevering man of this type was Lysander of Sparta, we are told; of the opposite type was Callicratidas, who succeeded Lysander as admiral of the fleet.
So we find that another, no matter how eminent he may be, will condescend in social intercourse to make himself appear but a very ordinary person.
Such graciousness of manner we have seen in the case of Catulus both father and son and also of Quintus Mucius Mancia.
I have heard from my elders that Publius Scipio Nasica was another master of this art; but his father, on the other hand the man who punished Tiberius Gracchus for his nefarious undertakings had no such gracious manner in social intercourse , and because of that very fact he rose to greatness and fame.
Countless other dissimilarities exist in natures and characters, and they are not in the least to be criticized.
Everybody, however, must resolutely hold fast to his own peculiar gifts, in so far as they are peculiar only and not vicious, in order that propriety, which is the object of our inquiry, may the more easily be secured.
For we must so act as not to oppose the universal laws of human nature, but, while safeguarding those, to follow the bent of our own particular nature; and even if other careers should be better and nobler, we may still regulate our own pursuits by the standard of our own nature.
For it is of no avail to fight against one's nature or to aim at what is impossible of attainment.
From this fact the nature of that propriety defined above comes into still clearer light, inasmuch as nothing is proper that "goes against the grain," as the saying is that is, if it is in direct opposition to one's natural genius.
If there is any such thing as propriety at all, it can be nothing more than uniform consistency in the course of our life as a whole and all its individual actions.
And this uniform consistency one could not maintain by copying the personal traits of others and eliminating one's own.
For as we ought to employ our mother-tongue, lest, like certain people who are continually dragging in Greek words, we draw well-deserved ridicule upon ourselves, so we ought not to introduce anything foreign into our actions or our life in general.
Indeed, such diversity of character carries with it so great significance that suicide may be for one man a duty, for another a crime.
Did Marcus Cato find himself in one predicament, and were the others, who surrendered to Caesar in Africa, in another?
And yet, perhaps, they would have been condemned, if they had taken their lives; for their mode of life had been less austere and their characters more pliable.
But Cato had been endowed by nature with an austerity beyond belief, and he himself had strengthened it by unswerving consistency and had remained ever true to his purpose and fixed resolve; and it was for him to die rather than to look upon the face of a tyrant.
How much Ulysses endured on those long wanderings, when he submitted to the service even of women (if Circe and Calypso may be called women) and strove in every word to be courteous and complaisant to all!
And, arrived at home, he brooked even the insults of his men-servants and maidservants, in order to attain in the end the object of his desire.
But Ajax, with the temper he is represented as having, would have chosen to meet death a thousand times rather than suffer such indignities!
If we take this into consideration, we shall see that it is each man's duty to weigh well what are his own peculiar traits of character, to regulate these properly, and not to wish to try how another man's would suit him.
For the more peculiarly his own a man's character is, the better it fits him.
Everyone, therefore, should make a proper estimate of his own natural ability and show himself a critical judge of his own merits and defects; in this respect we should not let actors display more practical wisdom than we have.
They select, not the best plays, but the ones best suited to their talents.
Those who rely most upon the quality of their voice take the Epigoni and the Medus; those who place more stress upon the action choose the Melanippa and the Clytaemnestra; Rupilius, whom I remember, always played in the Antiope, Aesopus rarely in the Ajax.
Shall a player have regard to this in choosing his role upon the stage, and a wise man fail to do so in selecting his part in life?
We shall, therefore, work to the best advantage in that role to which we are best adapted.
But if at some time stress of circumstances shall thrust us aside into some uncongenial part, we must devote to it all possible thought, practice, and pains, that we may be able to perform it, if not with propriety, at least with as little impropriety as possible; and we need not strive so hard to attain to points of excellence that have not been vouchsafed to us as to correct the faults we have.
To the two above-mentioned characters is added a third, which some chance or some circumstance imposes, and a fourth also, which we assume by our own deliberate choice.
Regal powers and military commands, nobility of birth and political office, wealth and influence, and their opposites depend upon chance and are, therefore, controlled by circumstances.
But what role we ourselves may choose to sustain is decided by our own free choice.
And so some turn to philosophy, others to the civil law, and still others to oratory, while in case of the virtues themselves one man prefers to excel in one, another in another.
They, whose fathers or forefathers have achieved distinction in some particular field, often strive to attain eminence in the same department of service: for example, Quintus, the son of Publius Mucius, in the law; Africanus, the son of Paulus, in the army.
And to that distinction which they have severally inherited from their fathers some have added lustre of their own; for example, that same Africanus, who crowned his inherited military glory with his own eloquence.
Timotheus, Conon's son, did the same: he proved himself not inferior to his father in military renown and added to that distinction the glory of culture and intellectual power.
It happens sometimes, too, that a man declines to follow in the footsteps of his fathers and pursues a vocation of his own.
And in such callings those very frequently achieve signal success who, though sprung from humble parentage, have set their aims high.
All these questions, therefore, we ought to bear thoughtfully in mind, when we inquire into the nature of propriety; but above all we must decide who and what manner of men we wish to be and what calling in life we would follow; and this is the most difficult problem in the world.
For it is in the years of early youth, when our judgment is most immature, that each of us decides that his calling in life shall be that to which he has taken a special liking.
And thus he becomes engaged in some particular calling and career in life, before he is fit to decide intelligently what is best for him.
For we cannot all have the experience of Hercules, as we find it in the words of Prodicus in Xenophon: "When Hercules was just coming into youth's estate (the time which Nature has appointed unto every man for choosing the path of life on which he would enter), he went out into a desert place.
And as he saw two paths, the path of Pleasure and the path of Virtue, he sat down and debated long and earnestly which one it were better for him to take."
This might, perhaps, happen to a Hercules, "scion of the seed of Jove"; but it cannot well happen to us; for we copy each the model he fancies, and we are constrained to adopt their pursuits and vocations.
But usually, we are so imbued with the teachings of our parents, that we fall irresistibly into their manners and customs.
Others drift with the current of popular opinion and make especial choice of those callings which the majority find most attractive.
Some, however, as the result either of some happy fortune or of natural ability, enter upon the right path of life, without parental guidance.
There is one class of people that is very rarely met with: it is composed of those who are endowed with marked natural ability, or exceptional advantages of education and culture, or both, and who also have time to consider carefully what career in life they prefer to follow; and in this deliberation the decision must turn wholly upon each individual's natural bent.
For we try to find out from each one's native disposition, as was said above, just what is proper for him; and this we require not only in case of each individual act but also in ordering the whole course of one's life; and this last is a matter to which still greater care must be given, in order that we may be true to ourselves throughout all our lives and not falter in the discharge of any duty.
But since the most powerful influence in the choice of a career is exerted by Nature, and the next most powerful by Fortune, we must, of course, take account of them both in deciding upon our calling in life; but, of the two, Nature claims the more attention.
For Nature is so much more stable and steadfast, that for Fortune to come into conflict with Nature seems like a combat between a mortal and a goddess.
If, therefore, anyone has conformed his whole plan of life to the kind of nature that is his (that is, his better nature), let him go on with it consistently for that is the essence of Propriety unless, perchance, he should discover that he has made a mistake in choosing his life work.
If this should happen (and it can easily happen), he must change his vocation and mode of life.
If circumstances favour such change, it will be effected with greater ease and convenience.
If not, it must be made gradually, step by step, just as, when friendships become no longer pleasing or desirable, it is more proper (so wise men think) to undo the bond little by little than to sever it at a stroke.
And when we have once changed our calling in life, we must take all possible care to make it clear that we have done so with good reason.
But whereas I said a moment ago that we have to follow in the steps of our fathers, let me make the following exceptions: first, we need not imitate their faults;
second, we need not imitate certain other things, if our nature does not permit such imitation; for example, the son of the elder Africanus (that Scipio who adopted the younger Africanus, the son of Paulus) could not on account of ill-health be so much like his father as Africanus had been like his.
If, then, a man is unable to conduct cases at the bar or to hold the people spell-bound with his eloquence or to conduct wars, still it will be his duty to practise these other virtues, which are within his reach justice, good faith, generosity, temperance, self-control that his deficiencies in other respects may be less conspicuous.
The noblest heritage, however, that is handed down from fathers to children, And one more precious than any inherited wealth, is a reputation for virtue and worthy deeds; and to dishonour this must be branded as a sin and a shame.
Since, too, the duties that properly belong to different times of life are not the same, but some belong to the young, others to those more advanced in years, a word must be said on this distinction also.
It is, then, the duty of a young man to show deference to his elders and to attach himself to the best and most approved of them, so as to receive the benefit of their counsel and influence.
For the inexperience of youth requires the practical wisdom of age to strengthen and direct it.
And this time of life is above all to be protected against sensuality and trained to toil and endurance of both mind and body, so as to be strong for active duty in military and civil service.
And even when they wish to relax their minds and give themselves up to enjoyment they should beware of excesses and bear in mind the rules of modesty.
And this will be easier, if the young are not unwilling to have their elders join them even in their pleasures.
The old, on the other hand, should, it seems, have their physical labours reduced; their mental activities should be actually increased.
They should endeavour, too, by means of their counsel and practical wisdom to be of as much service as possible to their friends and to the young, and above all to the state.
But there is nothing against which old age has to be more on its guard than against surrendering to feebleness and idleness, while luxury, a vice in any time of life, is in old age especially scandalous.
But if excess in sensual indulgence is added to luxurious living, it is a twofold evil; for old age not only disgraces itself; it also serves to make the excesses of the young more shameless.
At this point it is not at all irrelevant to discuss the duties of magistrates, of private individuals, and of foreigners.
It is, then, peculiarly the place of a magistrate to bear in mind that he represents the state and that it is his duty to uphold its honour and its dignity, to enforce the law, to dispense to all their constitutional rights, and to remember that all this has been committed to him as a sacred trust.
The private individual ought first, in private relations, to live on fair and equal terms with his fellowcitizens, with a spirit neither servile and grovelling nor yet domineering; and second, in matters pertaining to the state, to labour for her peace and honour; for such a man we are accustomed to esteem and call a good citizen.
As for the foreigner or the resident alien, it is his duty to attend strictly to his own concerns, not to pry into other people's business, and under no condition to meddle in the politics of a country not his own.
In this way I think we shall have a fairly clear view of our duties when the question arises what is proper and what is appropriate to each character, circumstance, and age.
But there is nothing so essentially proper as to maintain consistency in the performance of every act and in the conception of every plan.
But the propriety to which I refer shows itself also in every deed, in every word, even in every movement and attitude of the body.
And in outward, visible propriety there are three elements beauty, tact, and taste; these conceptions are difficult to express in words, but it will be enough for my purpose if they are understood.
In these three elements is included also our concern for the good opinion of those with whom and amongst whom we live.
For these reasons I should like to say a few words about this kind of propriety also.
First of all, Nature seems to have had a wonderful plan in the construction of our bodies.
Our face and our figure generally, in so far as it has a comely appearance, she has placed in sight; but the parts of the body that are given us only to serve the needs of Nature and that would present an unsightly and unpleasant appearance she has covered up and concealed from view.
Man's modesty has followed this careful contrivance of Nature's; all right-minded people keep out of sight what Nature has hidden and take pains to respond to Nature's demands as privately as possible; and in the case of those parts of the body which only serve Nature's needs, neither the parts nor the functions are called by their real names.
To perform these functions if only it be done in private is nothing immoral; but to speak of them is indecent.
And so neither public performance of those acts nor vulgar mention of them is free from indecency.
But we should give no heed to the Cynics (or to some Stoics who are practically Cynics) who censure and ridicule us for holding that the mere mention of some actions that are not immoral is shameful, while other things that are immoral we call by their real names.
Robbery, fraud, and adultery, for example, are immoral in deed, but it is not indecent to name them.
To beget children in wedlock is in deed morally right; to speak of it is indecent.
And they assail modesty with a great many other arguments to the same purport.
But as for us, let us follow Nature and shun everything that is offensive to our eyes or our ears.
So, in standing or walking, in sitting or reclining, in our expression, our eyes, or the movements of our hands, let us preserve what we have called "propriety."
In these matters we must avoid especially the two extremes: our conduct and speech should not be effeminate and over-nice, on the one hand, nor coarse and boorish, on the other.
And we surely must not admit that, while this rule applies to actors and orators, it is not binding upon us.
As for stage-people, their custom, because of its traditional discipline, carries modesty to such a point that an actor would never step out upon the stage without a breech-cloth on, for fear he might make an improper exhibition, if by some accident certain parts of his person should happen to become exposed.
And in our own custom, grown sons do not bathe with their fathers, nor sons-in-law with their fathers-in-law.
We must, therefore, keep to the path of this sort of modesty, especially when Nature is our teacher and guide.
Again, there are two orders of beauty: in the one, loveliness predominates; in the other, dignity; of these, we ought to regard loveliness as the attribute of woman, and dignity as the attribute of man.
Therefore, let all finery not suitable to a man's dignity be kept off his person, and let him guard against the like fault in gesture and action.
The manners taught in the palaestra, for example, are often rather objectionable, and the gestures of actors on the stage are not always free from affectation; but simple, unaffected manners are commendable in both instances.
Now dignity of mien is also to be enhanced by a good complexion; the complexion is the result of physical exercise.
We must besides present an appearance of neatness not too punctilious or exquisite, but just enough to avoid boorish and ill-bred slovenliness.
We must follow the same principle in regard to dress.
In this, as in most things, the best rule is the golden mean.
We must be careful, too, not to fall into a habit of listless sauntering in our gait, so as to look like carriers in festal processions, or of hurrying too fast, when time presses.
If we do this, it puts us out of breath, our looks are changed, our features distorted; and all this is clear evidence of a lack of poise.
But it is much more important that we succeed in keeping our mental operations in harmony with Nature's laws.
And we shall not fail in this if we guard against violent excitement or depression, and if we keep our minds intent on the observance of propriety.
Our mental operations, moreover, are of two kinds: some have to do with thought, others with impulse.
Thought is occupied chiefly with the discovery of truth; impulse prompts to action.
We must be careful, therefore, to employ our thoughts on themes as elevating as possible and to keep our impulses under the control of reason.
The power of speech in the attainment of propriety is great, and its function is twofold: the first is oratory; the second, conversation.
Oratory is the kind of discourse to be employed in pleadings in court and speeches in popular assemblies and in the senate; conversation should find its natural place in social gatherings, in informal discussions, and in intercourse with friends; it should also seek admission at dinners.
There are rules for oratory laid down by rhetoricians; there are none for conversation; and yet I do not know why there should not be.
But where there are students to learn, teachers are found; there are, however, none who make conversation a subject of study, whereas pupils throng about the rhetoricians everywhere.
And yet the same rules that we have for words and sentences in rhetoric will apply also to conversation.
Now since we have the voice as the organ of speech, we should aim to secure two properties for it: that it be clear, and that it be musical.
We must, of course, look to Nature for both gifts.
But distinctness may be improved by practice; the musical qualities, by imitating those who speak with smooth and articulate enunciation.
There was nothing in the two Catuli to lead one to suppose that they had a refined literary taste; they were men of culture, it is true; and so were others; but the Catuli were looked upon as the perfect masters of the Latin tongue.
Their pronunciation was charming; their words were neither mouthed nor mumbled: they avoided both indistinctness and affectation; their voices were free from strain, yet neither faint nor shrill.
More copious was the speech of Lucius Crassus and not less brilliant, but the reputation of the two Catuli for eloquence was fully equal to his.
But in wit and humour Caesar, the elder Catulus's half-brother, surpassed them all: even at the bar he would with his conversational style defeat other advocates with their elaborate orations.
If, therefore, we are aiming to secure propriety in every circumstance of life, we must master all these points.
Conversation, then, in which the Socratics are the best models, should have these qualities.
It should be easy and not in the least dogmatic; it should have the spice of wit.
And the one who engages in conversation should not debar others from participating in it, as if he were entering upon a private monopoly; but, as in other things, so in a general conversation he should think it not unfair for each to have his turn.
He should observe, first and foremost, what the subject of conversation is.
If it is grave, he should treat it with seriousness; if humorous, with wit.
And above all, he should be on the watch that his conversation shall not betray some defect in his character.
This is most likely to occur, when people in jest or in earnest take delight in making malicious and slanderous statements about the absent, on purpose to injure their reputations.
The subjects of conversation are usually affairs of the home or politics or the practice of the professions and learning.
Accordingly, if the talk begins to drift off to other channels, pains should be taken to bring it back again to the matter in hand but with due consideration to the company present; for we are not all interested in the same things at all times or in the same degree.
We must observe, too, how far the conversation is agreeable and, as it had a reason for its beginning, so there should be a point at which to close it tactfully.
But as we have a most excellent rule for every phase of life, to avoid exhibitions of passion, that is, mental excitement that is excessive and uncontrolled by reason; so our conversation ought to be free from such emotions:
let there be no exhibition of anger or inordinate desire, of indolence or indifference, or anything of the kind.
We must also take the greatest care to show courtesy and consideration toward those with whom we converse.
It may sometimes happen that there is need of administering reproof.
On such occasions we should, perhaps, use a more emphatic tone of voice and more forcible and severe terms and even assume an appearance of being angry.
But we shall have recourse to this sort of reproof, as we do to cautery and amputation, rarely and reluctantly never at all, unless it is unavoidable and no other remedy can be discovered.
We may seem angry, but anger should be far from us; for in anger nothing right or judicious can be done.
In most cases, we may apply a mild reproof, so combined, however, with earnestness, that, while severity is shown, offensive language is avoided.
Nay more, we must show clearly that even that very harshness which goes with our reproof is designed for the good of the person reproved.
The right course, moreover, even in our differences with our bitterest enemies, is to maintain our dignity and to repress our anger, even though we are treated outrageously.
For what is done under some degree of excitement cannot be done with perfect self-respect or the approval of those who witness it.
It is bad taste also to talk about oneself especially if what one says is not true and, amid the derision of one's hearers, to play "The Braggart Captain."
But since I am investigating this subject in all its phases (at least, that is my purpose), I must discuss also what sort of house a man of rank and station should, in my opinion, have.
Its prime object is serviceableness.
To this the plan of the building should be adapted; and yet careful attention should be paid to its convenience and distinction.
We have heard that Gnaeus Octavius the first of that family to be elected consul distinguished himself by building upon the Palatine an attractive and imposing house.
Everybody went to see it, and it was thought to have gained votes for the owner, a new man, in his canvass for the consulship.
That house Scaurus demolished, and on its site he built an addition to his own house.
Octavius, then, was the first of his family to bring the honour of a consulship to his house; Scaurus, though the son of a very great and illustrious man, brought to the same house, when enlarged, not only defeat, but disgrace and ruin.
The truth is, a man's dignity may be enhanced by the house he lives in, but not wholly secured by it; the owner should bring honour to his house, not the house to its owner.
And, as in everything else a man must have regard not for himself alone but for others also,
so in the home of a distinguished man, in which numerous guests must be entertained and crowds of every sort of people received, care must be taken to have it spacious.
But if it is not frequented by visitors, if it has an air of lonesomeness, a spacious palace often becomes a discredit to its owner.
This is sure to be the case if at some other time, when it had a different owner, it used to be thronged.
For it is unpleasant, when passers-by remark: "O good old house, alas! how different The owner who now owneth thee!
And in these times that may be said of many a house!
One must be careful, too, not to go beyond proper bounds in expense and display, especially if one is building for oneself.
For much mischief is done in this way, if only in the example set.
For many people imitate zealously the foibles of the great, particularly in this direction: for example, who copies the virtues of Lucius Lucullus, excellent man that he was?
But how many there are who have copied the magnificence of his villas!
Some limit should surely be set to this tendency and it should be reduced at least to a standard of moderation;
and by that same standard of moderation the comforts and wants of life generally should be regulated.
But enough on this part of my theme.
In entering upon any course of action, then, we must hold fast to three principles: first, that impulse shall obey reason; for there is no better way than this to secure the observance of duties; second, that we estimate carefully the importance of the object that we wish to accomplish, so that neither more nor less care and attention may be expended upon it than the case requires;
the third principle is that we be careful to observe moderation in all that is essential to the outward appearance and dignity of a gentleman.
Moreover, the best rule for securing this is strictly to observe that propriety which we have discussed above, and not to overstep it.
Yet of these three principles, the one of prime importance is to keep impulse subservient to reason.
Next, then, we must discuss orderliness of conduct and seasonableness of occasions.
These two qualities are embraced in that science which the Greeks call  not that which we translate with moderation, derived from moderate; but this is the  by which we understand orderly conduct.
And so, if we may call it also moderation, it is defined by the Stoics as follows: "Moderation is the science of disposing aright everything that is done or said."
So the essence of orderliness and of right-placing, it seems, will be the same; for orderliness they define also as "the arrangement of things in their suitable and appropriate places."
By "place of action," moreover, they mean seasonableness of circumstance; and the seasonable circumstance for an action is called in Greek , in Latin occasio.
So it comes about that in this sense moderation, which we explain as I have indicated, is the science of doing the right thing at the right time.
A similar definition can be given for prudence, of which I have spoken in an early chapter.
But in this part we are considering temperance and self-control and related virtues.
Accordingly, the properties which, as we found, are peculiar to prudence were discussed in their proper place, while those are to be discussed now which are peculiar to these virtues of which we have for some time been speaking and which relate to considerateness and to the approbation of our fellow-men.
Such orderliness of conduct is, therefore, to be observed, that everything in the conduct of our life shall balance and harmonize, as in a finished speech.
For it is unbecoming and highly censurable, when upon a serious theme, to introduce such jests as are proper at a dinner, or any sort of loose talk.
When Pericles was associated with the poet Sophocles as his colleague in command and they had met to confer about official business that concerned them both, a handsome boy chanced to pass and Sophocles said: "Look, Pericles; what a pretty boy!"
How pertinent was Pericles's reply: "Hush, Sophocles, a general should keep not only his hands but his eyes under control."
And yet, if Sophocles had made this same remark at a trial of athletes, he would have incurred no just reprimand.
So great is the significance of both place and circumstance.
For example, if anyone, while on a journey or on a walk, should rehearse to himself a case which he is preparing to conduct in court, or if he should under similar circumstances apply his closest thought to some other subject, he would not be open to censure but if he should do that same thing at a dinner, he would be thought ill-bred, because he ignored the proprieties of the occasion.
But flagrant breaches of good breeding, like singing in the streets or any other gross misconduct, are easily apparent and do not call especially for admonition and instruction.
But we must even more carefully avoid those seemingly trivial faults which pass unnoticed by the many.
However slightly out of tune a harp or flute may be, the fault is still detected by a connoisseur; so we must be on the watch lest haply something in our life be out of tune nay, rather, far greater is the need for painstaking, inasmuch as harmony of actions is far better and far more important than harmony of sounds.
As, therefore, a musical ear detects even the slightest falsity of tone in a harp, so we, if we wish to be keen and careful observers of moral faults, shall often draw important conclusions from trifles.
We observe others and from a glance of the eyes, from a contracting or relaxing of the brows, from an air of sadness, from an outburst of joy, from a laugh, from speech, from silence, from a raising or lowering of the voice, and the like, we shall easily judge which of our actions is proper, and which is out of accord with duty and Nature.
And, in the same manner, it is not a bad plan to judge of the nature of our every action by studying others, that so we may ourselves avoid anything that is unbecoming in them.
For it happens somehow or other that we detect another's failings more readily than we do our own; and so in the school-room those pupils learn most easily to do better whose faults the masters mimic for the sake of correcting them.
Nor is it out of place in making a choice between duties involving a doubt, to consult men of learning or practical wisdom and to ascertain what their views are on any particular question of duty.
For the majority usually drift as the current of their own natural inclinations carries them;
and in deriving counsel from one of these, we have to see not only what our adviser says, but also what he thinks, and what his reasons are for thinking as he does.
For, as painters and sculptors and even poets, too, wish to have their works reviewed by the public, in order that, if any point is generally criticized, it may be improved; and as they try to discover both by themselves and with the help of others what is wrong in their work; so through consulting the judgment of others we find that there are many things to be done and left undone, to be altered and improved.
But no rules need to be given about what is done in accordance with the established customs and conventions of a community; for these are in themselves rules; and no one ought to make the mistake of supposing that, because Socrates or Aristippus did or said something contrary to the manners and established customs of their city, he has a right to do the same; it was only by reason of their great and superhuman virtues that those famous men acquired this special privilege.
But the Cynics' whole system of philosophy must be rejected, for it is inimical to moral sensibility, and without moral sensibility nothing can be upright, nothing morally good.
It is, furthermore, our duty to honour and reverence those whose lives are conspicuous for conduct in keeping with their high moral standards, and who, as true patriots, have rendered or are now rendering efficient service to their country, just as much as if they were invested with some civil or military authority; it is our duty also to show proper respect to old age, to yield precedence to magistrates, to make a distinction between a fellow-citizen and a foreigner, and, in the case of the foreigner himself, to discriminate according to whether he has come in an official or a private capacity.
In a word, not to go into details, it is our duty to respect, defend, and maintain the common bonds of union and fellowship subsisting between all the members of the human race.
Now in regard to trades and other means of livelihood, which ones are to be considered becoming to a gentleman and which ones are vulgar, we have been taught, in general, as follows.
First, those means of livelihood are rejected as undesirable which incur people's ill-will, as those of tax-gatherers and usurers.
Unbecoming to a gentleman, too, and vulgar are the means of livelihood of all hired workmen whom we pay for mere manual labour, not for artistic skill; for in their case the very wage they receive is a pledge of their slavery.
Vulgar we must consider those also who buy from wholesale merchants to retail immediately; for they would get no profits without a great deal of downright lying; and verily, there is no action that is meaner than misrepresentation.
And all mechanics are engaged in vulgar trades; for no workshop can have anything liberal about it.
Least respectable of all are those trades which cater for sensual pleasures:
"Fishmongers, butchers, cooks, and poulterers, And fishermen, as Terence says.
Add to these, if you please, the perfumers, dancers, and the whole corps de ballet
But the professions in which either a higher degree of intelligence is required or from which no small benefit to society is derived medicine and architecture, for example, and teaching these are proper for those whose social position they become.
Trade, if it is on a small scale, is to be considered vulgar;
but if wholesale and on a large scale, importing large quantities from all parts of the world and distributing to many without misrepresentation, it is not to be greatly disparaged.
Nay, it even seems to deserve the highest respect, if those who are engaged in it, satiated, or rather, I should say, satisfied with the fortunes they have made, make their way from the port to a country estate, as they have often made it from the sea into port.
But of all the occupations by which gain is secured, none is better than agriculture, none more profitable, none more delightful, none more becoming to a freeman.
But since I have discussed this quite fully in, my Cato Major, you will find there the material that applies to this point.
Now, I think I have explained fully enough how moral duties are derived from the four divisions of moral rectitude.
But between those very actions which are morally right, a conflict and comparison may frequently arise, as to which of two moral actions is morally better a point overlooked by Panaetius.
For, since all moral rectitude springs from four sources (one of which is prudence; the second, social instinct; the third, courage; the fourth, temperance),it is often necessary in deciding a question of duty that these virtues be weighed against one another.
My view, therefore, is that those duties are closer to Nature which depend upon the social instinct than those which depend upon knowledge; and this view can be confirmed by the following argument: suppose that a wise man should be vouchsafed such a life that, with an abundance of everything pouring in upon him, he might in perfect peace study and ponder over everything that is worth knowing, still, if the solitude were so complete that he could never see a human being, he would die.
And then, the foremost of all virtues is wisdom what the Greeks call ; for by prudence, which they call , we understand something else, namely, the practical knowledge of things to be sought for and of things to be avoided.
Again, that wisdom which I have given the foremost place is the knowledge of things human and divine, which is concerned also with the bonds of union between gods and men and the relations of man to man.
If wisdom is the most important of the virtues, as it certainly is, it necessarily follows that that duty which is connected with the social obligation is the most important duty.
And service is better than mere theoretical knowledge, for the study and knowledge of the universe would somehow be lame and defective, were no practical results to follow.
Such results, moreover, are best seen in the safeguarding of human interests.
It is essential, then, to human society; and it should, therefore, be ranked above speculative knowledge.
Upon this all the best men agree, as they prove by their conduct.
For who is so absorbed in the investigation and study of creation, but that, even though he were working and pondering over tasks never so much worth mastering and even though he thought he could number the stars and measure the length and breadth of the universe, he would drop all those problems and cast them aside, if word were suddenly brought to him of some critical peril to his country, which he could relieve or repel?
And he would do the same to further the interests of parent or friend or to save him from danger.
From all this we conclude that the duties scribed by justice must be given precedence the pursuit of knowledge and the duties implied by it; for the former concern the welfare of fellow-men; and nothing ought to be more sacred in men's eyes than that.
And veteran scholars, whose whole life and interests have been devoted to the pursuit of knowledge, have not, after all, failed to contribute to the advantages and blessings of mankind.
For they have trained many to be better citizens and to render larger service to their country.
So, for example, the Pythagorean Lysis taught Epaminondas of Thebes; Plato, Dion of Syracuse; and many, many others.
As for me myself, whatever service I have rendered to my country if, indeed, I have rendered any I came to my task trained and equipped for it by my teachers and what they taught me.
And not only while present in the flesh do they teach and train those who are desirous of learning, but by the written memorials of their learning they continue the same service after they are dead.
For they have overlooked no point that has a bearing upon laws, customs, or political science; in fact, they seem to have devoted their retirement to the benefit of us who are engaged in public business.
The principal thing done, therefore, by those very devotees of the pursuits of learning and science is to apply their own practical wisdom and insight to the service of humanity.
And for that reason also much speaking (if only it contain wisdom) is better than speculation never so profound without speech; for mere speculation is self-centred, while speech extends its benefits to those with whom we are united by the bonds of society.
And again, as swarms of bees do not gather for the sake of making honeycomb but make the honeycomb because they are gregarious by nature, so human beings and to a much higher degree exercise their skill together in action and thought because they are naturally gregarious.
And so, if that virtue which centres in the safeguarding of human interests, that is, in the maintenance of human society, were not to accompany the pursuit of knowledge, that knowledge would seem isolated and barren of results.
In the same way, courage, if unrestrained by the uniting bonds of society, would be but a sort of brutality and savagery.
Hence it follows that the claims of human society and the bonds that unite men together take precedence of the pursuit of speculative knowledge.
And it is not true, as certain people maintain, that the bonds of union in human society were instituted in order to provide for the needs of daily life; for, they say, without the aid of others we could not secure for ourselves or supply to others the things that Nature requires; but if all that is essential to our wants and comfort were supplied by some magic wand, as in the stories, then every man of first-rate ability could drop all other responsibility and devote himself exclusively to learning and study.
Not at all.
For he would seek to escape from his loneliness and to find someone to share his studies; he would wish to teach, as well as to learn; to hear, as well as to speak.
Every duty, therefore, that tends effectively to maintain and safeguard human society should be given the preference over that duty which arises from speculation and science alone.
The following question should, perhaps, be asked: whether this social instinct, which is the deepest feeling in our nature, is always to have precedence over temperance and moderation also.
I think not.
For there are some acts either so repulsive or so wicked, that a wise man would not commit them, even to save his country.
Posidonius has made a large collection of them; but some of them are so shocking, so indecent, that it seems immoral even to mention them.
The wise man, therefore, will not think of doing any such thing for the sake of his country; no more will his country consent to have it done for her.
But the problem is the more easily disposed of because the occasion cannot arise when it could be to the state's interest to have the wise man do any of those things.
This, then, may be regarded as settled: in choosing between conflicting duties, that class takes precedence which is demanded by the interests of human society.
And this is the natural sequence; for discreet action will presuppose learning and practical wisdom; it follows, therefore, that discreet action is of more value than wise (but inactive) speculation.
So much must suffice for this topic.
For, in its essence, it has been made so clear, that in determining a question of duty it is not difficult to see which duty is to be preferred to any other.
Moreover, even in the social relations themselves there are gradations of duty so well defined that it can easily be seen which duty takes precedence of any other: our first duty is to the immortal gods; our second, to country; our third, to parents; and so on, in a descending scale, to the rest.
From this brief discussion, then, it can be understood that people are often in doubt not only whether an action is morally right or wrong, but also, when a choice is offered between two moral actions, which one is morally better.
This point, as I remarked above, has been overlooked by Panaetius.
But let us now pass on to what remains.
I believe, Marcus, my son, that I have fully explained in the preceding book how duties are derived from moral rectitude, or rather from each of virtue's four divisions.
My next step is to trace out those kinds of duty which have to do with the comforts of life, with the means of acquiring the things that people enjoy, with influence, and with wealth.
In this connection, the question is, as I said: what is expedient, and what is inexpedient; and of several expedients, which is of more and which of most importance.
These questions I shall proceed to discuss, after I have said a few words in vindication of my present purpose and my principles of philosophy.
Although my books have aroused in not a few men the desire not only to read but to write, yet I sometimes fear that what we term philosophy is distasteful to certain worthy gentlemen, and that they wonder that I devote so much time and attention to it.
Now, as long as the state was administered by the men to whose care she had voluntarily entrusted herself, I devoted all my effort and thought to her.
But when everything passed under the absolute control of a despot and there was no longer any room for statesmanship or authority of mine; and finally when I had lost the friends who had been associated with me in the task of serving the interests of the state, and who were men of the highest standing, I did not resign myself to grief, by which I should have been overwhelmed, had I not struggled against it; neither, on the other hand, did I surrender myself to a life of sensual pleasure unbecoming to a philosopher.
I would that the government had stood fast in the position it had begun to assume and had not fallen into the hands of men who desired not so much to reform as to abolish the constitution.
For then, in the first place, I should now be devoting my energies more to public speaking than to writing, as I used to do when the republic stood; and in the second place, I should be committing to written form not these present essays but my public speeches, as I often formerly did.
But when the republic, to which all my care and thought and effort used to be devoted, was no more, then, of course, my voice was silenced in the forum and in the senate.
And since my mind could not be wholly idle, I thought, as I had been well-read along these lines of thought from my early youth, that the most honourable way for me to forget my sorrows would be by turning to philosophy.
As a young man, I had devoted a great deal of time to philosophy as a discipline; but after I began to fill the high offices of state and devoted myself heart and soul to the public service, there was only so much time for philosophical studies as was left over from the claims of my friends and of the state; all of this was spent in reading; I had no leisure for writing.
Therefore, amid all the present most awful calamities I yet flatter myself that I have won this good out of evil that I may commit to written form matters not at all familiar to our countrymen but still very much worth their knowing.
For what, in the name of heaven, is more to be desired than wisdom? What is more to be prized? What is better for a man, what more worthy of his nature?
Those who seek after it are called philosophers; and philosophy is nothing else, if one will translate the word into our idiom, than "the love of wisdom."
Wisdom, moreover, as the word has been defined by the philosophers of old, is "the knowledge of things human and divine and of the causes by which those things are controlled."
And if the man lives who would belittle the study of philosophy, I quite fail to see what in the world he would see fit to praise.
For if we are looking for mental enjoyment and relaxation, what pleasure can be compared with the pursuits of those who are always studying out something that will tend toward and effectively promote a good and happy life?
Or, if regard is had for strength of character and virtue, then this is the method by which we can attain to those qualities, or there is none at all.
And to say that there is no "method" for securing the highest blessings, when none even of the least important concerns is without its method, is the language of people who talk without due reflection and who blunder in matters of the utmost importance.
Furthermore, if there is really a way to learn virtue, where shall one look for it, when one has turned aside from this field of learning?
Now, when I am advocating the study of philosophy, I usually discuss this subject at greater length, as I have done in another of my books.
For the present I meant only to explain why, deprived of the tasks of public service, I have devoted myself to this particular pursuit.
But people raise other objections against me and that, too, philosophers and scholars asking whether I think I am quite consistent in my conduct: for although our school maintains that nothing can be known for certain, yet, they urge, I make a habit of presenting my opinions on all sorts of subjects and at this very moment am trying to formulate rules of duty.
But I wish that they had a proper understanding of our position.
For we Academicians are not men whose minds wander in uncertainty and never know what principles to adopt.
For what sort of mental habit, or rather what sort of life would that be which should dispense with all rules for reasoning or even for living?
Not so with us; but, as other schools maintain that some things are certain, others uncertain, we, differing with them, say that some things are probable, others improbable.
What, then, is to hinder me from accepting what seems to me to be probable, while rejecting what seems to be improbable, and from shunning the presumption of dogmatism, while keeping clear of that recklessness of assertion which is as far as possible removed from true wisdom?
And as to the fact that our school argues against everything, that is only because we could not get a clear view of what is "probable," unless a comparative estimate were made of all the arguments on both sides.
But this subject has been, I think, quite fully set forth in my "Academics."
And although, my dear Cicero, you are a student of that most ancient and celebrated school of philosophy, with Cratippus as your master and he deserves to be classed with the founders of that illustrious sect still I wish our school, which is closely related to yours, not to be unknown to you.
Let us now proceed to the task in hand.
Five principles, accordingly, have been laid down for the pursuance of duty: two of them have to do with propriety and moral rectitude; two, with the external conveniences of life means, wealth, influence; the fifth, with the proper choice, if ever the four first mentioned seem to be in conflict.
The division treating of moral rectitude, then, has been completed, and this is the part with which I desire you to be most familiar.
The principle with which we are now dealing is that one which is called Expediency.
The usage of this word has been corrupted and perverted and has gradually come to the point where, separating moral rectitude from expediency, it is accepted that a thing may be morally right without being expedient, and expedient without being morally right.
No more pernicious doctrine than this could be introduced into human life.
There are, to be sure, philosophers of the very highest reputation who distinguish theoretically between these three conceptions, although they are indissolubly blended together; and they do this, I assume, on moral, conscientious principles.
For whatever is just, they hold, is also expedient; and, in like manner, whatever is morally right is also just. It follows, then, that whatever is morally right is also expedient.
Those who fail to comprehend that theory do often, in their admiration for shrewd and clever men, take craftiness for wisdom.
But they must be disabused of this error and their way of thinking must be wholly converted to the hope and conviction that it is only by moral character and righteousness, not by dishonesty and craftiness, that they may attain to the objects of their desires.
Of the things, then, that are essential to the sustenance of human life, some are inanimate (gold and silver, for example, the fruits of the earth, and so forth), and some are animate and have their own peculiar instincts and appetites.
Of these again some are rational, others irrational.
Horses, oxen, and the other cattle, bees, whose labour contributes more or less to the service and subsistence of man, are not endowed with reason; of rational beings two divisions are made gods and men.
Worship and purity of character will win the favour of the gods; and next to the gods, and a close second to them, men can be most helpful to men.
The same classification may likewise be made of the things that are injurious and hurtful.
But, as people think that the gods bring us no harm, they decide (leaving the gods out of the question) that men are most hurtful to men.
As for mutual helpfulness, those very things which we have called inanimate are for the most part themselves produced by man's labours; we should not have them without the application of manual labour and skill nor could we enjoy them without the intervention of man.
And so with many other things: for without man's industry there could have been no provisions for health, no navigation, no agriculture, no ingathering or storing of the fruits of the field or other kinds of produce.
Then, too, there would surely be no exportation of our superfluous commodities or importation of those we lack, did not men perform these services.
By the same process of reasoning, without the labour of man's hands, the stone needful for our use would not be quarried from the earth, nor would "iron, copper, gold, and silver, hidden far within," be mined.
And how could houses ever have been provided in the first place for the human race, to keep out the rigours of the cold and alleviate the discomforts of the heat; or how could the ravages of furious tempest or of earthquake or of time upon them afterward have been repaired, had not the bonds of social life taught men in such events to look to their fellow-men for help?
Think of the aqueducts, canals, irrigation works, breakwaters, artificial harbours; how should we have these without the work of man?
From these and many other illustrations it is obvious that we could not in any way, without the work of man's hands, have received the profits and the benefits accruing from inanimate things.
Finally, of what profit or service could animals be, without the co-operation of man?
For it was men who were the foremost in discovering what use could be made of each beast; and to-day, if it were not for man's labour, we could neither feed them nor break them in nor take care of them nor yet secure the profits from them in due season.
By man, too, noxious beasts are destroyed, and those that can be of use are captured.
Why should I recount the multitude of arts without which life would not be worth living at all?
For how would the sick be healed?
What pleasure would the hale enjoy?
What comforts should we have, if there were not so many arts to minister to our wants?
In all these respects the civilized life of man is far removed from the standard of the comforts and wants of the lower animals.
And, without the association of men, cities could not have been built or peopled.
In consequence of city life, laws and customs were established, and then came the equitable distribution of private rights and a definite social system.
Upon these institutions followed a more humane spirit and consideration for others, with the result that life was better supplied with all it requires, and by giving and receiving, by mutual exchange of commodities and conveniences, we succeeded in meeting all our wants.
I have dwelt longer on this point than was necessary.
For who is there to whom those facts which Panaetius narrates at great length are not self-evident namely, that no one, either as a general in war or as a statesman at home, could have accomplished great things for the benefit of the state, without the hearty co-operation of other men?
He cites the deeds of Themistocles, Pericles, Cyrus, Agesilaus, Alexander, who, he says, could not have achieved so great success without the support of other men.
He calls in witnesses, whom he does not need, to prove a fact that no one questions.
And yet, as, on the one hand, we secure great advantages through the sympathetic co-operation of our fellow-men; so, on the other, there is no curse so terrible but it is brought down by man upon man.
There is a book by Dicaearchus on "The Destruction of Human Life."
He was a famous and eloquent Peripatetic, and he gathered together all the other causes of destruction floods, epidemics, famines, and sudden incursions of wild animals in myriads, by whose assaults, he informs us, whole tribes of men have been wiped out.
And then he proceeds to show by way of comparison how many more men have been destroyed by the assaults of men that is, by wars or revolutions than by any and all other sorts of calamity.
Since, therefore, there can be no doubt on this point, that man is the source of both the greatest help and the greatest harm to man, I set it down as the peculiar function of virtue to win the hearts of men and to attach them to one's own service.
And so those benefits that human life derives from inanimate objects and from the employment and use of animals are ascribed to the industrial arts; the co-operation of men, on the other hand, prompt and ready for the advancement of our interests, is secured through wisdom and virtue .
And, indeed, virtue in general may be said to consist almost wholly in
three properties: the first is Wisdom, the ability to perceive what in any given instance is true and real, what its relations are, its consequences, and its causes;
the second is Temperance, the ability to restrain the passions (which the Greeks call ) and make the impulses () obedient to reason;
and the third is Justice, the skill to treat with consideration and wisdom those with whom we are associated, in order that we may through their co-operation have our natural wants supplied in full and overflowing measure, that we may ward off any impending trouble, avenge ourselves upon those who have attempted to injure us, and visit them with such retribution as justice and humanity will permit.
I shall presently discuss the means by which we can gain the ability to win and hold the affections of our fellow-men; but I must say a few words by way of preface.
Who fails to comprehend the enormous, two-fold power of Fortune for weal and for woe?
When we enjoy her favouring breeze, we are wafted over to the wished-for haven; when she blows against us, we are dashed to destruction.
Fortune herself, then, does send those other less usual calamities, arising, first, from inanimate Nature hurricanes, storms, shipwrecks, catastrophes, conflagrations; second, from wild beasts kicks, bites, and attacks.
But these, as I have said, are comparatively rare.
But think, on the one side, of the destruction of armies (three lately, and many others at many different times), the loss of generals (of a very able and eminent commander recently), the hatred of the masses, too, and the banishment that as a consequence frequently comes to men of eminent services, their degradation and voluntary exile; think, on the other hand, of the successes, the civil and military honours, and the victories; though all these contain an element of chance, still they cannot be brought about, whether for good or for ill, without the influence and the co-operation of our fellow-men.
With this understanding of the influence of Fortune, I may proceed to explain how we can win the affectionate co-operation of our fellows and enlist it in our service.
And if the discussion of this point is unduly prolonged, let the length be compared with the importance of the object in view.
It will then, perhaps, seem even too short.
Whenever, then, people bestow anything upon a fellow-man to raise his estate or his dignity, it may be from any one of several motives: it may be out of good-will, when for some reason they are fond of him; it may be from esteem, if they look up to his worth and think him deserving of the most splendid fortune a man can have; they may have confidence in him and think that they are thus acting for their own interests; or they may fear his power; they may, on the contrary, hope for some favour as, for example, when princes or demagogues bestow gifts of money; or, finally, () they may be moved by the promise of payment or reward.
This last is, I admit, the meanest and most sordid motive of all, both for those who are swayed by it and for those who venture to resort to it.
For things are in a bad way, when that which should be obtained by merit is attempted by money.
But since recourse to this kind of support is sometimes indispensable, I shall explain how it should be employed; but first I shall discuss those qualities which are more closely allied to merit.
Now, it is by various motives that people are led to submit to another's authority and power:
they may be influenced () by good-will; () by gratitude for generous favours conferred upon them; () by the eminence of that other's social position or by the hope that their submission will turn to their own account; () by fear that they may be compelled perforce to submit; () they may be captivated by the hope of gifts of money and by liberal promises; or, finally, they may be bribed with money, as we have frequently seen in our own country.
But, of all motives, none is better adapted to secure influence and hold it fast than love; nothing is more foreign to that end than fear.
For Ennius says admirably: "Whom they fear they hate.
And whom one hates, one hopes to see him dead.
And we recently discovered, if it was not known before, that no amount of power can withstand the hatred of the many.
The death of this tyrant, whose yoke the state endured under the constraint of armed force and whom it still obeys more humbly than ever, though he is dead, illustrates the deadly effects of popular hatred; and the same lesson is taught by the similar fate of all other despots, of whom practically no one has ever escaped such a death.
For fear is but a poor safeguard of lasting power; while affection, on the other hand, may be trusted to keep it safe for ever.
But those who keep subjects in check by force would of course have to employ severity masters, for example, toward their servants, when these cannot be held in control in any other way.
But those who in a free state deliberately put themselves in a position to be feared are the maddest of the mad.
For let the laws be never so much overborne by some one individual's power, let the spirit of freedom be never so intimidated, still sooner or later they assert themselves either through unvoiced public sentiment, or through secret ballots disposing of some high office of state.
Freedom suppressed and again regained bites with keener fangs than freedom never endangered.
Let us, then, embrace this policy, which appeals to every heart and is the strongest support not only of security but also of influence and power namely, to banish fear and cleave to love.
And thus we shall most easily secure success both in private and in public life.
Furthermore, those who wish to be feared must inevitably be afraid of those whom they intimidate.
What, for instance, shall we think of the elder Dionysius? With what tormenting fears he used to be racked! For through fear of the barber's razor he used to have his hair singed off with a glowing coal.
In what state of mind do we fancy Alexander of Pherae lived?
We read in history that he dearly loved his wife Thebe; and yet, whenever he went from the banquet-hall to her in her chamber, he used to order a barbarian one, too, tattooed like a Thracian, as the records state to go before him with a drawn sword; and he used to send ahead some of his bodyguard to pry into the lady's caskets and to search and see whether some weapon were not concealed in her wardrobe.
Unhappy man! To think a barbarian, a branded slave, more faithful than his own wife!
Nor was he mistaken.
For he was murdered by her own hand, because she suspected him of infidelity.
And indeed no power is strong enough to be lasting, if it labours under the weight of fear.
Witness Phalaris, whose cruelty is notorious beyond that of all others.
He was slain, not treacherously (like that Alexander whom I named but now), not by a few conspirators (like that tyrant of ours), but the whole population of Agrigentum rose against him with one accord.
Again, did not the Macedonians abandon Demetrius and march over as one man to Pyrrhus?
And again, when the Spartans exercised their supremacy tyrannically, did not practically all the allies desert them and view their disaster at Leuctra, as idle spectators?
I prefer in this connection to draw my illustrations from foreign history rather than from our own.
Let me add, however, that as long as the empire of the Roman People maintained itself by acts of service, not of oppression, wars were waged in the interest of our allies or to safeguard our supremacy; the end of our wars was marked by acts of clemency or by only a necessary degree of severity; the senate was a haven of refuge for kings, tribes, and nations;
and the highest ambition of our magistrates and generals was to defend our provinces and allies with justice and honour.
And so our government could be called more accurately a protectorate of the world than a dominion.
This policy and practice we had begun gradually to modify even before Sulla's time; but since his victory we have departed from it altogether.
For the time had gone by when any oppression of the allies could appear wrong, seeing that atrocities so outrageous were committed against Roman citizens.
In Sulla's case, therefore, an unrighteous victory disgraced a righteous cause.
For when he had planted his spear and was selling under the hammer in the forum the property of men who were patriots and men of wealth and, at least, Roman citizens, he had the effrontery to announce that "he was selling his spoils."
After him came one who, in an unholy cause, made an even more shameful use of victory; for he did not stop at confiscating the property of individual citizens, but actually embraced whole provinces and countries in one common ban of ruin.
And so, when foreign nations had been oppressed and ruined, we have seen a model of Marseilles carried in a triumphal procession, to serve as proof to the world that the supremacy of the people had been forfeited;
and that triumph we saw celebrated over a city without whose help our generals have never gained a triumph for their wars beyond the Alps.
I might mention many other outrages against our allies, if the sun had ever beheld anything more infamous than this particular one.
Justly, therefore, are we being punished.
For if we had not allowed the crimes of many to go unpunished, so great licence would never have centred in one individual.
His estate descended by inheritance to but a few individuals, his ambitions to many scoundrels.
And never will the seed and occasion of civil war be wanting, so long as villains remember that bloodstained spear and hope to see another.
As Publius Sulla wielded that spear, when his kinsman was dictator, so again thirty-six years later he did not shrink from a still more criminal spear.
And still another Sulla, who was a mere clerk under the former dictatorship, was under the later one a city quaestor.
From this, one would realize that, if such rewards are offered, civil wars will never cease to be.
And so in Rome only the walls of her houses remain standing and even they wait now in fear of the most unspeakable crimes but our republic we have lost for ever.
But to return to my subject: it is while we have preferred to be the object of fear rather than of love and affection, that all these misfortunes have fallen upon us.
And if such retribution could overtake the Roman People for their injustice and tyranny, what ought private individuals to expect?
And since it is manifest that the power of good-will is so great and that of fear is so weak, it remains for us to discuss by what means we can most readily win the affection, linked with honour and confidence, which we desire.
But we do not all feel this need to the same extent; for it must be determined in conformity with each individual's vocation in life whether it is essential for him to have the affection of many or whether the love of a few will suffice.
Let this then be settled as the first and absolute essential that we have the devotion of friends, affectionate and loving, who value our worth.
For in just this one point there is but little difference between the greatest and the ordinary man; and friendship is to be cultivated almost equally by both.
All men do not, perhaps, stand equally in need of political honour, fame, and the good-will of their fellow-citizens; nevertheless, if these honours come to a man, they help in many ways, and especially in the acquisition of friends.
But friendship has been discussed in another book of mine, entitled "Laelius."
Let us now take up the discussion of Glory, although I have published two books on that subject also.
Still, let us touch briefly on it here, since it is of very great help in the conduct of more important business.
The highest, truest glory depends upon the following three things: the affection, the confidence, and the mingled admiration and esteem of the people.
Such sentiments, if I may speak plainly and concisely, are awakened in the masses in the same way as in individuals.
But there is also another avenue of approach to the masses, by which we can, as it were, steal into the hearts of all at once.
But of the three above-named requisites, let us look first at good-will and the rules for securing it.
Good-will is won principally through kind services; next to that, it is elicited by the will to do a kind service, even though nothing happen to come of it. Then, too, the love of people generally is powerfully attracted by a man's mere name and reputation for generosity, kindness, justice, honour, and all those virtues that belong to gentleness of character and affability of manner.
And because that very quality which we term moral goodness and propriety is pleasing to us by and of itself and touches all our hearts both by its inward essence and its outward aspect and shines forth with most lustre through those virtues named above, we are, therefore, compelled by Nature herself to love those in whom we believe those virtues to reside.
Now these are only the most powerful motives to love not all of them; there may be some minor ones besides.
Secondly, the command of confidence can be secured on two conditions: if people think us possessed of practical wisdom combined with a sense of justice.
For we have confidence in those who we think have more understanding than ourselves, who, we believe, have better insight into the future, and who, when an emergency arises and a crisis comes, can clear away the difficulties and reach a safe decision according to the exigencies of the occasion; for that kind of wisdom the world accounts genuine and practical.
But confidence is reposed in men who are just and true that is, good men on the definite assumption that their characters admit of no suspicion of dishonesty or wrong-doing.
And so we believe that it is perfectly safe to entrust our lives, our fortunes, and our children to their care.
Of these two qualities, then, justice has the greater power to inspire confidence; for even without the aid of wisdom, it has considerable weight; but wisdom without justice is of no avail to inspire confidence;
for take from a man his reputation for probity, and the more shrewd and clever he is, the more hated and mistrusted he becomes.
Therefore, justice combined with practical wisdom will command all the confidence we can desire; justice without wisdom will be able to do much; wisdom without justice will be of no avail at all.
But I am afraid someone may wonder why I am now separating the virtues as if it were possible for anyone to be just who is not at the same time wise; for it is agreed upon among all philosophers, and I myself have often argued, that he who has one virtue has them all.
The explanation of my apparent inconsistency is that the precision of speech we employ, when abstract truth is critically investigated in philosophic discussion, is one thing; and that employed, when we are adapting our language entirely to popular thinking, is another.
And therefore I am speaking here in the popular sense, when I call some men brave, others good, and still others wise; for in dealing with popular conceptions we must employ familiar words in their common acceptation; and this was the practice of Panaetius likewise.
But let us return to the subject.
The third, then, of the three conditions I named as essential to glory is that we be accounted worthy of the esteem and admiration of our fellow-men.
While people admire in general everything that is great or better than they expect, they admire in particular the good qualities that they find unexpectedly in individuals.
And so they reverence and extol with the highest praises those men in whom they see certain pre-eminent and extraordinary talents; and they look down with contempt upon those who they think have no ability, no spirit, no energy.
For they do not despise all those of whom they think ill.
For some men they consider unscrupulous, slanderous, fraudulent, and dangerous; they do not despise them, it may be; but they do think ill of them.
And therefore, as I said before, those are despised who are "of no use to themselves or their neighbours," as the saying is, who are idle, lazy, and indifferent.
On the other hand, those are regarded with admiration who are thought to excel others in ability and to be free from all dishonour and also from those vices which others do not easily resist.
For sensual pleasure, a most seductive mistress, turns the hearts of the greater part of humanity away from virtue; and when the fiery trial of affliction draws near, most people are terrified beyond measure.
Life and death, wealth and want affect all men most powerfully.
But when men, with a spirit great and exalted, can look down upon such outward circumstances, whether prosperous or adverse, and when some noble and virtuous purpose, presented to their minds, converts them wholly to itself and carries them away in its pursuit, who then could fail to admire in them the splendour and beauty of virtue?
As, then, this superiority of mind to such externals inspires great admiration, so justice, above all, on the basis of which alone men are called "good men," seems to people generally a quite marvellous virtue and not without good reason; for no one can be just who fears death or pain or exile or poverty, or who values their opposites above equity.
And people admire especially the man who is uninfluenced by money; and if a man has proved himself in this direction, they think him tried as by fire.
Those three requisites, therefore, which were presupposed as the means of obtaining glory, are all secured by justice: () good-will, for it seeks to be of help to the greatest number; confidence, for the same reason; and admiration, because it scorns and cares nothing for those things, with a consuming passion for which most people are carried away.
Now, in my opinion at least, every walk and vocation in life calls for human co-operation first and above all, in order that one may have friends with whom to enjoy social intercourse.
And this is not easy, unless one is looked upon as a good man.
So, even to a man who shuns society and to one who spends his life in the country a reputation for justice is essential even more so than to others; for they who do not have it will have no defence to protect them and so will be the victims of many kinds of wrong.
So also to buyers and sellers, to employers and employed, and to those who are engaged in commercial dealings generally, justice is indispensable for the conduct of business.
Its importance is so great, that not even those who live by wickedness and crime can get on without some small element of justice.
For if a robber takes anything by force or by fraud from another member of the gang, he loses his standing even in a band of robbers; and if the one called the "Pirate Captain" should not divide the plunder impartially, he would be either deserted or murdered by his comrades.
Why, they say that robbers even have a code of laws to observe and obey.
And so, because of his impartial division of booty, Bardulis, the Illyrian bandit, of whom we read in Theopompus, acquired great power, Viriathus, of Lusitania, much greater.
He actually defied even our armies and generals.
But Gaius Laelius the one surnamed "the Wise" in his praetorship crushed his power, reduced him to terms, and so checked his intrepid daring, that he left to his successors an easy conquest.
Since, therefore, the efficacy of justice is so great that it strengthens and augments the power even of robbers, how great do we think its power will be in a constitutional government with its laws and courts?
Now it seems to me, at least, that not only among the Medes, as Herodotus tells us, but also among our own ancestors, men of high moral character were made kings in order that the people might enjoy justice.
For, as the masses in their helplessness were oppressed by the strong, they appealed for protection to some one man who was conspicuous for his virtue; and, as he shielded the weaker classes from wrong, he managed by establishing equitable conditions to hold the higher and the lower classes in an equality of right.
The reason for making constitutional laws was the same as that for making kings.
For what people have always sought is equality of rights before the law.
For rights that were not open to all alike would be no rights.
If the people secured their end at the hands of one just and good man, they were satisfied with that; but when such was not their good fortune, laws were invented, to speak to all men at all times in one and the same voice.
This, then, is obvious: nations used to select for their rulers those men whose reputation for justice was high in the eyes of the people.
If in addition they were also thought wise, there was nothing that men did not think they could secure under such leadership.
Justice is, therefore, in every way to be cultivated and maintained, both for its own sake (for otherwise it would not be justice) and for the enhancement of personal honour and glory.
But as there is a method not only of acquiring money but also of investing it so as to yield an income to meet our continuously recurring expenses both for the necessities and for the more refined comforts of life so there must be a method of gaining glory and turning it to account.
And yet, as Socrates used to express it so admirably, "the nearest way to glory a short cut, as it were is to strive to be what you wish to be thought to be."
For if anyone thinks that he can win lasting glory by pretence, by empty show, by hypocritical talk and looks, he is very much mistaken.
True glory strikes deep root and spreads its branches wide; but all pretences soon fall to the ground like fragile flowers, and nothing counterfeit can be lasting.
There are very many witnesses to both facts; but, for brevity's sake, I shall confine myself to one family:
Tiberius Gracchus, Publius's son, will be held in honour as long as the memory of Rome shall endure; but his sons were not approved by patriots while they lived, and since they are dead they are numbered among those whose murder was justifiable.
If, therefore, anyone wishes to win true glory, let him discharge the duties required by justice.
And what they are has been set forth in the course of the preceding book.
But, although the very essence of the problem is that we actually be what we wish to be thought to be, still some rules may be laid down to enable us most easily to secure the reputation of being what we are.
For, if anyone in his early youth has the responsibility of living up to a distinguished name acquired either by inheritance from his father (as, I think, my dear Cicero, is your good fortune) or by some chance or happy combination of circumstances, the eyes of the world are turned upon him; his life and character are scrutinized; and, as if he moved in a blaze of light, not a word and not a deed of his can be kept a secret.
Those, on the other hand, whose humble and obscure origin has kept them unknown to the world in their early years ought, as soon as they approach young manhood, to set a high ideal before their eyes and to strive with unswerving zeal towards its realization.
This they will do with the better heart, because that time of life is accustomed to find favour rather than to meet with opposition.
Well, then, the first thing to recommend to a young man in his quest for glory is that he try to win it, if he can, in a military career.
Among our forefathers many distinguished themselves as soldiers; for warfare was almost continuous then.
The period of your own youth, however, has coincided with that war in which the one side was too prolific in crime, the other in failure.
And yet, when Pompey placed you in command of a cavalry squadron in this war, you won the applause of that great man and of the army for your skill in riding and spear-throwing and for endurance of all the hardships of the soldier's life.
But that credit accorded to you came to nothing along with the fall of the republic.
The subject of this discussion, however, is not your personal history, but the general theme.
Let us, therefore, proceed to the sequel.
As, then, in everything else brain-work is far more important than mere hand-work, so those objects which we strive to attain through intellect and reason gain for us a higher degree of gratitude than those which we strive to gain by physical strength.
The best recommendation, then, that a young man can have to popular esteem proceeds from self-restraint, filial affection, and devotion to kinsfolk.
Next to that, young men win recognition most easily and most favourably, if they attach themselves to men who are at once wise and renowned as well as patriotic counsellors in public affairs.
And if they associate constantly with such men, they inspire in the public the expectation that they will be like them, seeing that they have themselves selected them for imitation.
His frequent visits to the home of Publius Mucius assisted young Publius Rutilius to gain a reputation for integrity of character and for ability as a jurisconsult.
Not so, however, Lucius Crassus; for, though he was a mere boy, he looked to no one else for assistance, but by his own unaided ability he won for himself in that brilliant and famous prosecution a splendid reputation as an orator.
And at an age when young men are accustomed with their school exercises to win applause as students of oratory, this Roman Demosthenes, Lucius Crassus, was already proving himself in the law-courts a master of the art which he might even then have been studying at home with credit to himself.
But as the classification of discourse is a twofold one conversation, on the one side; oratory, on the other there can be no doubt that of the two this debating power (for that is what we mean by eloquence) counts for more toward the attainment of glory; and yet, it is not easy to say how far an affable and courteous manner in conversation may go toward winning the affections.
We have, for instance, the letters of Philip to Alexander, of Antipater to Cassander, and of Antigonus to Philip the Younger.
The authors of these letters were, as we are informed, three of the wisest men in history; and in them they instruct their sons to woo the hearts of the populace to affection by words of kindness and to keep their soldiers loyal by a winning address.
But the speech that is delivered in a debate before an assembly often stirs the hearts of thousands at once; for the eloquent and judicious speaker is received with high admiration, and his hearers think him understanding and wise beyond all others.
And, if his speech have also dignity combined with moderation, he will be admired beyond all measure, especially if these qualities are found in a young man.
But while there are occasions of many kinds that call for eloquence, and while many young men in our republic have obtained distinction by their speeches in the courts, in the popular assemblies, and in the senate, yet it is the speeches before our courts that excite the highest admiration.
The classification of forensic speeches also is a twofold one:
they are divided into arguments for the prosecution and arguments for the defence.
And while the side of the defence is more honourable, still that of the prosecution also has very often established a reputation.
I spoke of Crassus a moment ago; Marcus Antonius, when a youth, had the same success.
A prosecution brought the eloquence of Publius Sulpicius into favourable notice, when he brought an action against Gaius Norbanus, a seditious and dangerous citizen.
But this should not be done often never, in fact, except in the interest of the state (as in the cases of those above mentioned) or to avenge wrongs (as the two Luculli, for example, did) or for the protection of our provincials (as I did in the defence of the Sicilians, or Julius in the prosecution of Albucius in behalf of the Sardinians).
The activity of Lucius Fufius in the impeachment of Manius Aquilius is likewise famous.
This sort of work, then, may be done once in a lifetime, or at all events not often.
But if it shall be required of anyone to conduct more frequent prosecutions, let him do it as a service to his country; for it is no disgrace to be often employed in the prosecution of her enemies.
And yet a limit should be set even to that.
For it requires a heartless man, it seems, or rather one who is well-nigh inhuman, to be arraigning one person after another on capital charges.
It is not only fraught with danger to the prosecutor himself, but is damaging to his reputation, to allow himself to be called a prosecutor.
Such was the effect of this epithet upon Marcus Brutus, the scion of a very noble family and the son of that Brutus who was an eminent authority in the civil law.
Again, the following rule of duty is to be carefully observed: never prefer a capital charge against any person who may be innocent.
For that cannot possibly be done without making oneself a criminal.
For what is so unnatural as to turn to the ruin and destruction of good men the eloquence bestowed by Nature for the safety and protection of our fellowmen?
And yet, while we should never prosecute the innocent, we need not have scruples against undertaking on occasion the defence of a guilty person, provided he be not infamously depraved and wicked.
For people expect it; custom sanctions it; humanity also accepts it.
It is always the business of the judge in a trial to find out the truth; it is sometimes the business of the advocate to maintain what is plausible, even if it be not strictly true, though I should not venture to say this, especially in an ethical treatise, if it were not also the position of Panaetius, that strictest of Stoics.
Then, too, briefs for the defence are most likely to bring glory and popularity to the pleader, and all the more so, if ever it falls to him to lend his aid to one who seems to be oppressed and persecuted by the influence of someone in power.
This I have done on many other occasions; and once in particular, in my younger days, I defended Sextus Roscius of Ameria against the power of Lucius Sulla when he was acting the tyrant.
The speech is published, as you know.
Now that I have set forth the moral duties of a young man, in so far as they may be exerted for the attainment of glory, I must next in order discuss kindness and generosity.
The manner of showing it is twofold: kindness is shown to the needy either by personal service, or by gifts of money.
The latter way is the easier, especially for a rich man; but the former is nobler and more dignified and more becoming to a strong and eminent man.
For, although both ways alike betray a generous wish to oblige, still in the one case the favour makes a draft upon one's bank account, in the other upon one's personal energy; and the bounty which is drawn from one's material substance tends to exhaust the very fountain of liberality.
Liberality is thus forestalled by liberality: for the more people one has helped with gifts of money, the fewer one can help.
But if people are generous and kind in the way of personal service that is, with their ability and personal effort various advantages arise: first, the more people they assist, the more helpers they will have in works of kindness; and second, by acquiring the habit of kindness they are better prepared and in better training, as it were, for bestowing favours upon many.
In one of his letters Philip takes his son Alexander sharply to task for trying by gifts of money to secure the good-will of the Macedonians:
"What in the mischief induced you to entertain such a hope," he says, "as that those men would be loyal subjects to you whom you had corrupted with money?
Or are you trying to do what you can to lead the Macedonians to expect that you will be not their king but their steward and purveyor?"
Steward and purveyor was well said, because it was degrading for a prince; better still, when he called the gift of money "corruption."
For the recipient goes from bad to worse and is made all the more ready to be constantly looking for one bribe after another.
It was to his son that Philip gave this lesson; but let us all take it diligently to heart.
That liberality, therefore, which consists in personal service and effort is more honourable, has wider application, and can benefit more people; There can be no doubt about that.
Nevertheless, we should sometimes make gifts of money; and this kind of liberality is not to be discouraged altogether.
We must often distribute from our purse to the worthy poor, but we must do so with discretion and moderation.
For many have squandered their patrimony by indiscriminate giving.
But what is worse folly than to do the thing you like in such a way that you can no longer do it at all?
Then, too, lavish giving leads to robbery; for when through over-giving men begin to be impoverished, they are constrained to lay their hands on the property of others.
And so, when men aim to be kind for the sake of winning good-will, the affection they gain from the objects of their gifts is not so great as the hatred they incur from those whom they despoil.
One's purse, then, should not be closed so tightly that a generous impulse cannot open it, nor yet so loosely held as to be open to everybody.
A limit should be observed and that limit should be determined by our means.
We ought, in a word, to remember the phrase, which, through being repeated so very often by our countrymen, has come to be a common proverb: "Bounty has no bottom."
For indeed what limit can there be, when those who have been accustomed to receive gifts claim what they have been in the habit of getting, and those who have not wish for the same bounty?
There are, in general, two classes of those who give largely: the one class is the lavish, the other the generous.
The lavish are those who squander their money on public banquets, doles of meat among the people, gladiatorial shows, magnificent games, and wild-beast fights vanities of which but a brief recollection will remain, or none at all.
The generous, on the other hand, are those who employ their own means to ransom captives from brigands, or who assume their friends' debts or help in providing dowries for their daughters, or assist them in acquiring property or increasing what they have.
And so I wonder what Theophrastus could have been thinking about when he wrote his book on "Wealth."
It contains much that is fine; but his position is absurd, when he praises at great length the magnificent appointments of the popular games, and it is in the means for indulging in such expenditures that he finds the highest privilege of wealth.
But to me the privilege it gives for the exercise of generosity, of which I have given a few illustrations, seems far higher and far more certain.
How much more true and pertinent are Aristotle's words, as he rebukes us for not being amazed at this extravagant waste of money, all to win the favour of the populace.
If people in time of siege, he says, "are required to pay a mina for a pint of water, this seems to us at first beyond belief, and all are amazed; but, when they think about it, they make allowances for it on the plea of necessity.
But in the matter of this enormous waste and unlimited expenditure we are not very greatly astonished, and that, too, though by it no extreme need is relieved, no dignity is enhanced, and the very gratification of the populace is but for a brief, passing moment; such pleasure as it is, too, is confined to the most frivolous, and even in these the very memory of their enjoyment dies as soon as the moment of gratification is past."
His conclusion, too, is excellent: "This sort of amusement pleases children, silly women, slaves, and the servile free; but a serious-minded man who weighs such matters with sound judgment cannot possibly approve of them."
And yet I realize that in our country, even in the good old times, it had become a settled custom to expect magnificent entertainments from the very best men in their year of aedileship.
So both Publius Crassus, who was not merely surnamed "The Rich" but was rich in fact, gave splendid games in his aedileship; and a little later Lucius Crassus (with Quintus Mucius, the most unpretentious man in the world, as his colleague) gave most magnificent entertainments in his aedileship.
Then came Gaius Claudius, the son of Appius, and, after him, many others the Luculli, Hortensius, and Silanus.
Publius Lentulus, however, in the year of my consulship, eclipsed all that had gone before him, and Scaurus emulated him.
And my friend Pompey's exhibitions in his second consulship were the most magnificent of all.
And so you see what I think about all this sort of thing.
Still we should avoid any suspicion of penuriousness.
Mamercus was a very wealthy man, and his refusal of the aedileship was the cause of his defeat for the consulship.
If, therefore, such entertainment is demanded by the people, men of right judgment must at least consent to furnish it, even if they do not like the idea.
But in so doing they should keep within their means, as I myself did.
They should likewise afford such entertainment, if gifts of money to the people are to be the means of securing on some occasion some more important or more useful object.
Thus Orestes recently won great honour by his public dinners given in the streets, on the pretext of their being a tithe-offering.
Neither did anybody find fault with Marcus Seius for supplying grain to the people at an as the peck at a time when the market-price was prohibitive; for he thus succeeded in disarming the bitter and deep-seated prejudice of the people against him at an outlay neither very great nor discreditable to him in view of the fact that he was aedile at the time.
But the highest honour recently fell to my friend Milo, who bought a band of gladiators for the sake of the country, whose preservation then depended upon my recall from exile, and with them put down the desperate schemes, the reign of terror, of Publius Clodius.
The justification for gifts of money, therefore, is either necessity or expediency.
And, in making them even in such cases, the rule of the golden mean is best.
To be sure, Lucius Philippus, the son of Quintus, a man of great ability and unusual renown, used to make it his boast that without giving any entertainments he had risen to all the positions looked upon as the highest within the gift of the state.
Cotta could say the same, and Curio.
I, too, may make this boast my own to a certain extent; for in comparison with the eminence of the offices to which I was unanimously elected at the earliest legal age and this was not the good fortune of any one of those just mentioned the outlay in my aedileship was very inconsiderable.
Again, the expenditure of money is better justified when it is made for walls, docks, harbours, aqueducts, and all those works which are of service to the community.
There is, to be sure, more of present satisfaction in what is handed out, like cash down; nevertheless public improvements win us greater gratitude with posterity.
Out of respect for Pompey's memory I am rather diffident about expressing any criticism of theatres, colonnades, and new temples; and yet the greatest philosophers do not approve of them our Panaetius himself, for example, whom I am following, not slavishly translating, in these books;
so, too, Demetrius of Phalerum, who denounces Pericles, the foremost man of Greece, for throwing away so much money on the magnificent, far-famed Propylaea.
But this whole theme is discussed at length in my books on "The Republic."
To conclude, the whole system of public bounties in such extravagant amount is intrinsically wrong; but it may under certain circumstances be necessary to make them; even then they must be proportioned to our ability and regulated by the golden mean.
Now, as touching that second division of gifts of money, those which are prompted by a spirit of generosity, we ought to look at different cases differently.
The case of the man who is overwhelmed by misfortune is different from that of the one who is seeking to better his condition, though he suffers from no actual distress.
It will be the duty of charity to incline more to the unfortunate, unless, perchance, they deserve their misfortune.
But of course we ought by no means to withhold our assistance altogether from those who wish for aid, not to save them from utter ruin but to enable them to reach a higher degree of fortune.
But, in selecting worthy cases, we ought to use judgment and discretion.
For, as Ennius says so admirably, "Good deeds misplaced, methinks, are evil deeds.
Furthermore, the favour conferred upon a man who is good and grateful finds its reward, in such a case, not only in his own good-will but in that of others.
For, when generosity is not indiscriminate giving, it wins most gratitude and people praise it with more enthusiasm, because goodness of heart in a man of high station becomes the common refuge of everybody.
Pains must, therefore, be taken to benefit as many as possible with such kindnesses that the memory of them shall be handed down to children and to children's children, so that they too may not be ungrateful.
For all men detest ingratitude and look upon the sin of it as a wrong committed against themselves also, because it discourages generosity; and they regard the ingrate as the common foe of all the poor.
Ransoming prisoners from servitude and relieving the poor is a form of charity that is a service to the state as well as to the individual.
And we find in one of Crassus's orations the full proof given that such beneficence used to be the common practice of our order.
This form of charity, then, I much prefer to the lavish expenditure of money for public exhibitions.
The former is suited to men of worth and dignity, the latter to those shallow flatterers, if I may call them so, who tickle with idle pleasure, so to speak, the fickle fancy of the rabble.
It will, moreover, befit a gentleman to be at the same time liberal in giving and not inconsiderate in exacting his dues, but in every business relation in buying or selling, in hiring or letting, in relations arising out of adjoining houses and lands to be fair, reasonable, often freely yielding much of his own right, and keeping out of litigation as far as his interests will permit and perhaps even a little farther.
For it is not only generous occasionally to abate a little of one's rightful claims, but it is sometimes even advantageous.
We should, however, have a care for our personal property, for it is discreditable to let it run through our fingers; but we must guard it in such a way that there shall be no suspicion of meanness or avarice.
For the greatest privilege of wealth is, beyond all peradventure, the opportunity it affords for doing good, without sacrificing one's fortune.
Hospitality also is a theme of Theophrastus's praise, and rightly so.
For, as it seems to me at least, it is most proper that the homes of distinguished men should be open to distinguished guests.
And it is to the credit of our country also that men from abroad do not fail to find hospitable entertainment of this kind in our city.
It is, moreover, a very great advantage, too, for those who wish to obtain a powerful political influence by honourable means to be able through their social relations with their guests to enjoy popularity and to exert influence abroad.
For an instance of extraordinary hospitality, Theophrastus writes that at Athens Cimon was hospitable even to the Laciads, the people of his own deme; for he instructed his bailiffs to that end and gave them orders that every attention should be shown to any Laciad who should ever call at his country home.
Again, the kindnesses shown not by gifts of money but by personal service are bestowed sometimes upon the community at large, sometimes upon individual citizens.
To protect a man in his legal rights, to assist him with counsel, and to serve as many as possible with that sort of knowledge tends greatly to increase one's influence and popularity.
Thus, among the many admirable ideas of our ancestors was the high respect they always accorded to the study and interpretation of the excellent body of our civil law.
And down to the present unsettled times the foremost men of the state have kept this profession exclusively in their own hands; but now the prestige of legal learning has departed along with offices of honour and positions of dignity;
and this is the more deplorable, because it has come to pass in the lifetime of a man who in knowledge of the law would easily have surpassed all his predecessors, while in honour he is their peer.
Service such as this, then, finds many to appreciate it and is calculated to bind people closely to us by our good services.
Closely connected with this profession, furthermore, is the gift of eloquence; it is at once more popular and more distinguished.
For what is better than eloquence to awaken the admiration of one's hearers or the hopes of the distressed or the gratitude of those whom it has protected?
It was to eloquence, therefore, that our fathers assigned the foremost rank among the civil professions.
The door of opportunity for generous patronage to others, then, is wide open to the orator whose heart is in his work and who follows the custom of our forefathers in undertaking the defence of many clients without reluctance and without compensation.
My subject suggests that at this point I express once more my regret at the decadence, not to say the utter extinction, of eloquence; and I should do so, did I not fear that people would think that I were complaining on my own account.
We see, nevertheless, what orators have lost their lives and how few of any promise are left, how far fewer there are who have ability, and how many there are who have nothing but presumption.
But though not all no, not even many can be learned in the law or eloquent as pleaders, still anybody may be of service to many by canvassing in their support for appointments, by witnessing to their character before juries and magistrates, by looking out for the interests of one and another, and by soliciting for them the aid of jurisconsults or of advocates.
Those who perform such services win the most gratitude and find a most extensive sphere for their activities.
Of course, those who pursue such a course do not need to be warned (for the point is self-evident) to be careful when they seek to oblige some, not to offend others.
For oftentimes they hurt those whom they ought not or those whom it is inexpedient to offend.
If they do it inadvertently, it is carelessness; if designedly, inconsiderateness.
A man must apologize also, to the best of his ability, if he has involuntarily hurt anyone's feelings, and explain why what he has done was unavoidable and why he could not have done otherwise; and he must by future services and kind offices atone for the apparent offence.
Now in rendering helpful service to people, we usually consider either their character or their circumstances.
And so it is an easy remark, and one commonly made, to say that in investing kindnesses we look not to people's outward circumstances, but to their character.
The phrase is admirable!
But who is there, pray, that does not in performing a service set the favour of a rich and influential man above the cause of a poor, though most worthy, person?
For, as a rule, our will is more inclined to the one from whom we expect a prompter and speedier return.
But we should observe more carefully how the matter really stands:
the poor man of whom we spoke cannot return a favour in kind, of course, but if he is a good man he can do it at least in thankfulness of heart.
As someone has happily said, "A man has not repaid money, if he still has it; if he has repaid it, he has ceased to have it.
But a man still has the sense of favour, if he has returned the favour; and if he has the sense of the favour, he has repaid it."
On the other hand, they who consider themselves wealthy, honoured, the favourites of fortune, do not wish even to be put under obligations by our kind services.
Why, they actually think that they have conferred a favour by accepting one, however great; and they even suspect that a claim is thereby set up against them or that something is expected in return.
Nay more, it is bitter as death to them to have accepted a patron or to be called clients.
Your man of slender means, on the other hand, feels that whatever is done for him is done out of regard for himself and not for his outward circumstances.
Hence he strives to show himself grateful not only to the one who has obliged him in the past but also to those from whom he expects similar favours in the future and he needs the help of many; and his own service, if he happens to render any in return, he does not exaggerate, but he actually depreciates it.
This fact, furthermore, should not be overlooked that, if one defends a wealthy favourite of fortune, the favour does not extend further than to the man himself or, possibly, to his children.
But, if one defends a man who is poor but honest and upright, all the lowly who are not dishonest and there is a large proportion of that sort among the people look upon such an advocate as a tower of defence raised up for them.
I think, therefore, that kindness to the good is a better investment than kindness to the favourites of fortune.
We must, of course, put forth every effort to oblige all sorts and conditions of men, if we can.
But if it comes to a conflict of duty on this point, we must, I should say, follow the advice of Themistocles:
when someone asked his advice whether he should give his daughter in marriage to a man who was poor but honest or to one who was rich but less esteemed, he said: "For my part, I prefer a man without money to money without a man."
But the moral sense of to-day is demoralized and depraved by our worship of wealth.
Of what concern to any one of us is the size of another man's fortune?
It is, perhaps, an advantage to its possessor; but not always even that.
But suppose it is; he may, to be sure, have more money to spend; but how is he any the better man for that?
Still, if he is a good man, as well as a rich one, let not his riches be a hindrance to his being aided, if only they are not the motive to it; but in conferring favours our decision should depend entirely upon a man's character, not on his wealth.
The supreme rule, then, in the matter of kindnesses to be rendered by personal service is never to take up a case in opposition to the right nor in defence of the wrong.
For the foundation of enduring reputation and fame is justice, and without justice there can be nothing worthy of praise.
Now, since we have finished the discussion of that kind of helpful services which concern individuals, we must next take up those which touch the whole body politic and the state.
Of these public services, some are of such a nature that they concern the whole body of citizens; others, that they affect individuals only.
And these latter are the more productive of gratitude.
If possible, we should by all means attend to both kinds of service; but we must take care in protecting the interests of individuals that what we do for them shall be beneficial, or at least not prejudicial, to the state.
Gaius Gracchus inaugurated largesses of grain on an extensive scale; this had a tendency to exhaust the exchequer.
Marcus Octavius inaugurated a moderate dole; this was both practicable for the state and necessary for the commons; it was, therefore, a blessing both to the citizens and to the state.
The man in an administrative office, however, must make it his first care that everyone shall have what belongs to him and that private citizens suffer no invasion of their property rights by act of the state.
It was a ruinous policy that Philippus proposed when in his tribuneship he introduced his agrarian bill.
However, when his law was rejected, he took his defeat with good grace and displayed extraordinary moderation.
But in his public speeches on the measure he often played the demagogue, and that time viciously, when he said that "there were not in the state two thousand people who owned any property."
That speech deserves unqualified condemnation, for it favoured an equal distribution of property; and what more ruinous policy than that could be conceived?
For the chief purpose in the establishment of constitutional state and municipal governments was that individual property rights might be secured.
For, although it was by Nature's guidance that men were drawn together into communities, it was in the hope of safeguarding their possessions that they sought the protection of cities.
The administration should also put forth every effort to prevent the levying of a property tax, and to this end precautions should be taken long in advance; Such a tax was often levied in the times of our forefathers on account of the depleted state of their treasury and their incessant wars.
But, if any state (I say "any," for I would rather speak in general terms than forebode evils to our own; however, I am not discussing our own state but states in general) if any state ever has to face a crisis requiring the imposition of such a burden, every effort must be made to let all the people realize that they must bow to the inevitable, if they wish to be saved.
And it will also be the duty of those who direct the affairs of the state to take measures that there shall be an abundance of the necessities of life.
It is needless to discuss the ordinary ways and means; for the duty is self-evident; it is necessary only to mention the matter.
But the chief thing in all public administration and public service is to avoid even the slightest suspicion of self-seeking.
I would, says Gaius Pontius, the Samnite, "that fortune had withheld my appearance until a time when the Romans began to accept bribes, and that I had been born in those days!
I should then have suffered them to hold their supremacy no longer."
Aye, but he would have had many generations to wait; for this plague has only recently infected our nation.
And so I rejoice that Pontius lived then instead of now, seeing that he was so mighty a man!
It is not yet a hundred and ten years since the enactment of Lucius Piso's bill to punish extortion; there had been no such law before.
But afterward came so many laws, each more stringent than the other, so many men were accused and so many convicted, so horrible a war was stirred up on account of the fear of what our courts would do to still others, so frightful was the pillaging and plundering of the allies when the laws and courts were suppressed, that how we find ourselves strong not in our own strength but in the weakness of others.
Panaetius praises Africanus for his integrity in public life.
Why should he not?
But Africanus had other and greater virtues.
The boast of official integrity belongs not to that man alone but also to his times.
When Paulus got possession of all the wealth of Macedon and it was enormous he brought into our treasury so much money that the spoils of a single general did away with the need for a tax on property in Rome for all time to come.
But to his own house he brought nothing save the glory of an immortal name.
Africanus emulated his father's example and was none the richer for his overthrow of Carthage.
And what shall we say of Lucius Mummius, his colleague in the censorship?
Was he one penny the richer when he had destroyed to its foundations the richest of cities?
He preferred to adorn Italy rather than his own house.
And yet by the adornment of Italy his own house was, as it seems to me, still more splendidly adorned.
There is, then, to bring the discussion back to the point from which it digressed, no vice more offensive than avarice, especially in men who stand foremost and hold the helm of state.
For to exploit the state for selfish profit is not only immoral; it is criminal, infamous.
And so the oracle, which the Pythian Apollo uttered, that "Sparta should not fall from any other cause than avarice," seems to be a prophecy not to the Lacedaemonians alone, but to all wealthy nations as well.
They who direct the affairs of state, then, can win the good-will of the masses by no other means more easily than by self-restraint and self-denial.
But they who pose as friends of the people, and who for that reason either attempt to have agrarian laws passed, in order that the occupants may be driven out of their homes, or propose that money loaned should be remitted to the borrowers, are undermining the foundations of the commonwealth: first of all, they are destroying harmony, which cannot exist when money is taken away from one party and bestowed upon another; and second, they do away with equity, which is utterly subverted, if the rights of property are not respected.
For, as I said above, it is the peculiar function of the state and the city to guarantee to every man the free and undisturbed control of his own particular property.
And yet, when it comes to measures so ruinous to public welfare, they do not gain even that popularity which they anticipate.
For he who has been robbed of his property is their enemy; he to whom it has been turned over actually pretends that he had no wish to take it; and most of all, when his debts are cancelled, the debtor conceals his joy, for fear that he may be thought to have been insolvent;
whereas the victim of the wrong both remembers it and shows his resentment openly.
Thus even though they to whom property has been wrongfully awarded be more in number than they from whom it has been unjustly taken, they do not for that reason have more influence; for in such matters influence is measured not by numbers but by weight.
And how is it fair that a man who never had any property should take possession of lands that had been occupied for many years or even generations, and that he who had them before should lose possession of them?
Now, it was on account of just this sort of wrong-doing that the Spartans banished their ephor Lysander, and put their king Agis to death an act without precedent in the history of Sparta.
From that time on and for the same reason dissensions so serious ensued that tyrants arose, the nobles were sent into exile, and the state, though most admirably constituted, crumbled to pieces.
Nor did it fall alone, but by the contagion of the ills that, starting in Lacedaemon, spread widely and more widely, it dragged the rest of Greece down to ruin.
What shall we say of our own Gracchi, the sons of that famous Tiberius Gracchus and grandsons of Africanus?
Was it not strife over the agrarian issue that caused their downfall and death?
Aratus of Sicyon, on the other hand, is justly praised.
When his city had been kept for fifty years in the power of its tyrants, he came over from Argos to Sicyon, secretly entered the city and took it by surprise; he fell suddenly upon the tyrant Nicocles, recalled from banishment six hundred exiles who had been the wealthiest men of the city, and by his coming made his country free.
But he found great difficulty in the matter of property and its occupancy; for he considered it most unjust, on the one hand, that those men should be left in want whom he had restored and of whose property others had taken possession; and he thought it hardly fair, on the other hand, that tenure of fifty years' standing should be disturbed.
For in the course of that long period many of those estates had passed into innocent hands by right of inheritance, many by purchase, many by dower.
He therefore decided that it would be wrong either to take the property away from the present incumbents or to let them keep it without compensation to its former possessors.
So, when he had come to the conclusion that he must have money to meet the situation, he announced that he meant to make a trip to Alexandria and gave orders that matters should remain as they were until his return.
And so he went in haste to his friend Ptolemy, then upon the throne, the second king after the founding of Alexandria.
To him he explained that he wished to restore constitutional liberty to his country and presented his case to him.
And, being a man of the highest standing, he easily secured from that wealthy king assistance in the form of a large sum of money.
And, when he had returned with this to Sicyon, he called into counsel with him fifteen of the foremost men of the city.
With them he investigated the cases both of those who were holding possession of other people's property and of those who had lost theirs.
And he managed by a valuation of the properties to persuade some that it was more desirable to accept money and surrender their present holdings; others he convinced that it was more to their interest to take a fair price in cash for their lost estates than to try to recover possession of what had been their own.
As a result, harmony was preserved, and all parties went their way without a word of complaint.
A great statesman, and worthy to have been born in our commonwealth!
That is the right way to deal with one's fellow-citizens, and not, as we have already witnessed on two occasions, to plant the spear in the forum and knock down the property of citizens under the auctioneer's hammer.
But yon Greek, like a wise and excellent man, thought that he must look out for the welfare of all.
And this is the highest statesmanship and the soundest wisdom on the part of a good citizen, not to divide the interests of the citizens but to unite all on the basis of impartial justice.
Let them live in their neighbour's house rent-free.
Why so?
In order that, when I have bought, built, kept up, and spent my money upon a place, you may without my consent enjoy what belongs to me?
What else is that but to rob one man of what belongs to him and to give to another what does not belong to him?
And what is the meaning of an abolition of debts, except that you buy a farm with my money; that you have the farm, and I have not my money?
We must, therefore, take measures that there shall be no indebtedness of a nature to endanger the public safety.
It is a menace that can be averted in many ways; but should a serious debt be incurred, we are not to allow the rich to lose their property, while the debtors profit by what is their neighbour's.
For there is nothing that upholds a government more powerfully than its credit; and it can have no credit, unless the payment of debts is enforced by law.
Never were measures for the repudiation of debts more strenuously agitated than in my consulship.
Men of every sort and rank attempted with arms and armies to force the project through.
But I opposed them with such energy that this plague was wholly eradicated from the body politic.
Indebtedness was never greater; debts were never liquidated more easily or more fully; for the hope of defrauding the creditor was cut off and payment was enforced by law.
But the present victor, though vanquished then, still carried out his old design, when it was no longer of any personal advantage to him.
So great was his passion for wrong-doing that the very doing of wrong was a joy to him for its own sake, even when there was no motive for it.
Those, then, whose office it is to look after the interests of the state will refrain from that form of liberality which robs one man to enrich another.
Above all, they will use their best endeavours that everyone shall be protected in the possession of his own property by the fair administration of the law and the courts, that the poorer classes shall not be oppressed because of their helplessness, and that envy shall not stand in the way of the rich, to prevent them from keeping or recovering possession of what justly belongs to them; they must strive, too, by whatever means they can, in peace or in war, to advance the state in power, in territory, and in revenues.
Such service calls for great men; it was commonly rendered in the days of our ancestors; if men will perform duties such as these, they will win popularity and glory for themselves and at the same time render eminent service to the state.
Now, in this list of rules touching expediency, Antipater of Tyre, a Stoic philosopher who recently died at Athens, claims that two points were overlooked by Panaetius the care of health and of property.
I presume that the eminent philosopher overlooked these two items because they present no difficulty.
At all events they are expedient.
Individual health is preserved by studying ones own constitution, by observing what is good or bad for one, by constant self-control in supplying physical wants and comforts (but only to the extent necessary to self-preservation), by forgoing sensual pleasures, and finally, by the professional skill of those to whose science these matters belong.
As for property, it is a duty to make money, but only by honourable means; it is a duty also to save it and increase it by care and thrift.
These principles Xenophon, a pupil of Socrates, has set forth most happily in his book entitled "Oeconomicus."
When I was about your present age, I translated it from the Greek into Latin.
But this whole subject of acquiring money, investing money (I wish I could include also spending money),is more profitably discussed by certain worthy gentlemen on "Change" than could be done by any philosophers of any school.
For all that, we must take cognizance of them; for they come fitly under the head of expediency, and that is the subject of the present book.
But it is often necessary to weigh one expediency against another; for this, as I stated, is a fourth point overlooked by Panaetius.
For not only are physical advantages regularly compared with outward advantages and outward, with physical, but physical advantages are compared with one another, and outward with outward.
Physical advantages are compared with outward advantages in some such way as this: one may ask whether it is more desirable to have health than wealth; external advantages with physical, thus: whether it is better to have wealth than extraordinary bodily strength; while the physical advantages may be weighed against one another, so that good health is preferred to sensual pleasure, strength to agility.
Outward advantages also may be weighed against one another: glory, for example, may be preferred to riches, an income derived from city property to one derived from the farm.
To this class of comparisons belongs that famous saying of old Cato's: when he was asked what was the most profitable feature of an estate, he replied: "Raising cattle successfully."
What next to that?
"Raising cattle with fair success."
And next?
Raising cattle with but slight success.
And fourth?
"Raising crops."
And when his questioner said, "How about money-lending?"
Cato replied: "How about murder?"
From this as well as from many other incidents we ought to realize that expediencies have often to be weighed against one another and that it is proper for us to add this fourth division in the discussion of moral duty.
Let us now pass on to the remaining problems.
Cato, who was of about the same years, Marcus, my son, as that Publius Scipio who first bore the surname of Africanus, has given us the statement that Scipio used to say that he was never less idle than when he had nothing to do and never less lonely than when he was alone.
An admirable sentiment, in truth, and becoming to a great and wise man.
It shows that even in his leisure hours his thoughts were occupied with public business and that he used to commune with himself when alone; and so not only was he never unoccupied, but he sometimes had no need for company.
The two conditions, then, that prompt others to idleness leisure and solitude only spurred him on.
I wish I could say the same of myself and say it truly.
But if by imitation I cannot attain to such excellence of character, in aspiration, at all events, I approach it as nearly as I can; for as I am kept by force of armed treason away from practical politics and from my practice at the bar, I am now leading a life of leisure.
For that reason I have left the city and, wandering in the country from place to place, I am often alone.
But I should not compare this leisure of mine with that of Africanus, nor this solitude with his.
For he, to find leisure from his splendid services to his country, used to take a vacation now and then and to retreat from the assemblies and the throngs of men into solitude, as into a haven of rest.
But my leisure is forced upon me by want of public business, not prompted by any desire for repose.
For now that the senate has been abolished and the courts have been closed, what is there, in keeping with my self-respect, that I can do either in the senatechamber or in the forum?
So, although I once lived amid throngs of people and in the greatest publicity, I am now shunning the sight of the miscreants with whom the world abounds and withdrawing from the public eye as far as I may, and I am often alone.
But I have learned from philosophers that among evils one ought not only to choose the least, but also to extract even from these any element of good that they may contain.
For that reason, I am turning my leisure to account though it is not such repose as the man should be entitled to who once brought the state repose from civil strife and I am not letting this solitude, which necessity and not my will imposes on me, find me idle.
And yet, in my judgment, Africanus earned the higher praise.
For no literary monuments of his genius have been published, we have no work produced in his leisure hours, no product of his solitude.
From this fact we may safely infer that, because of the activity of his mind and the study of those problems to which he used to direct his thought, he was never unoccupied, never lonely.
But I have not strength of mind enough by means of silent meditation to forget my solitude; and so I have turned all my attention and endeavour to this kind of literary work.
I have, accordingly, written more in this short time since the downfall of the republic than I did in the course of many years, while the republic stood.
But, my dear Cicero, while the whole field of philosophy is fertile and productive and no portion of it barren and waste, still no part is richer or more fruitful than that which deals with moral duties; for from these are derived the rules for leading a consistent and moral life.
And therefore, although you are, as I trust, diligently studying and profiting by these precepts under the direction of our friend Cratippus, the foremost philosopher of the present age, I still think it well that your ears should be dinned with such precepts from every side and that, if it could be, they should hear nothing else.
These precepts must be laid to heart by all who look forward to a career of honour, and I am inclined to think that no one needs them more than you.
For you will have to fulfil the eager anticipation that you will imitate my industry, the confident expectation that you will emulate my course of political honours, and the hope that you will, perhaps, rival my name and fame.
You have, besides, incurred a heavy responsibility on account of Athens and Cratippus: for, since you have gone to them for the purchase, as it were, of a store of liberal culture, it would be a great discredit to you to return empty-handed, thereby disgracing the high reputation of the city and of your master.
Therefore, put forth the best mental effort of which you are capable; work as hard as you can (if learning is work rather than pleasure); do your very best to succeed; and do not, when I have put all the necessary means at your disposal, allow it to be said that you have failed to do your part.
But enough of this.
For I have written again and again for your encouragement.
Let us now return to the remaining section of our subject as outlined.
Panaetius, then, has given us what is unquestionably the most thorough discussion of moral duties that we have, and I have followed him in the main but with slight modifications.
He classifies under three general heads the ethical problems which people are accustomed to consider and weigh: first, the question whether the matter in hand is morally right or morally wrong; second, whether it is expedient or inexpedient; third, how a decision ought to be reached, in case that which has the appearance of being morally right clashes with that which seems to be expedient.
He has treated the first two heads at length in three books; but, while he has stated that he meant to discuss the third head in its proper turn, he has never fulfilled his promise.
And I wonder the more at this, because Posidonius, a pupil of his, records that Panaetius was still alive thirty years after he published those three books.
And I am surprised that Posidonius has but briefly touched upon this subject in certain memoirs of his, and especially, as he states that there is no other topic in the whole range of philosophy so essentially important as this.
Now, I cannot possibly accept the view of those who say that that point was not overlooked but purposely omitted by Panaetius, and that it was not one that ever needed discussion, because there never can be such a thing as a conflict between expediency and moral rectitude.
But with regard to this assertion, the one point may admit of doubt whether that question which is third in Panaetius's classification ought to have been included or omitted altogether; but the other point is not open to debate that it was included in Panaetius's plan but left unwritten.
For, if a writer has finished two divisions of a threefold subject, the third must necessarily remain for him to do.
Besides, he promises at the close of the third book that he will discuss this division also in its proper turn.
We have also in Posidonius a competent witness to the fact.
He writes in one of his letters that Publius Rutilius Rufus, who also was a pupil of Panaetius's, used to say that "as no painter had been found to complete that part of the Venus of Cos which Apelles had left unfinished (for the beauty of her face made hopeless any attempt adequately to represent the rest of the figure), so no one, because of the surpassing excellence of what Panaetius did complete, would venture to supply what he had left undone."
In regard to Panaetius's real intentions, therefore, no doubt can be entertained.
But whether he was or was not justified in adding this third division to the inquiry about duty may, perhaps, be a matter for debate.
For whether moral goodness is the only good, as the Stoics believe, or whether, as your Peripatetics think, moral goodness is in so far the highest good that everything else gathered together into the opposing scale would have scarcely the slightest weight, it is beyond question that expediency can never conflict with moral rectitude.
And so, we have heard, Socrates used to pronounce a curse upon those who first drew a conceptual distinction between things naturally inseparable.
With this doctrine the Stoics are in agreement in so far as they maintain that if anything is morally right, it is expedient, and if anything is not morally right, it is not expedient.
But if Panaetius were the sort of man to say that virtue is worth cultivating only because it is productive of advantage, as do certain philosophers who measure the desirableness of things by the standard of pleasure or of absence of pain, he might argue that expediency sometimes clashes with moral rectitude.
But since he is a man who judges that the morally right is the only good, and that those things which come in conflict with it have only the appearance of expediency and cannot make life any better by their presence nor any worse by their absence, it follows that he ought not to have raised a question involving the weighing of what seems expedient against what is morally right.
Furthermore, when the Stoics speak of the supreme good as "living conformably to Nature," they mean, as I take it, something like this: that we are always to be in accord with virtue, and from all other things that may be in harmony with Nature to choose only such as are not incompatible with virtue.
This being so, some people are of the opinion that it was not right to introduce this counterbalancing of right and expediency and that no practical instruction should have been given on this question at all.
And yet moral goodness, in the true and proper sense of the term, is the exclusive possession of the wise and can never be separated from virtue; but those who have not perfect wisdom cannot possibly have perfect moral goodness, but only a semblance of it.
And indeed these duties under discussion in these books the Stoics call "mean duties"; they are a common possession and have wide application; and many people attain to the knowledge of them through natural goodness of heart and through advancement in learning.
But that duty which those same Stoics call "right" is perfect and absolute and "satisfies all the numbers," as that same school says, and is attainable by none except the wise man.
On the other hand, when some act is performed in which we see "mean" duties manifested, that is generally regarded as fully perfect, for the reason that the common crowd does not, as a rule, comprehend how far it falls short of real perfection; but, as far as their comprehension does go, they think there is no deficiency.
This same thing ordinarily occurs in the estimation of poems, paintings, and a great many other works of art: ordinary people enjoy and praise things that do not deserve praise.
The reason for this, I suppose, is that those productions have some point of excellence which catches the fancy of the uneducated, because these have not the ability to discover the points of weakness in any particular piece of work before them.
And so, when they are instructed by experts, they readily abandon their former opinion.
The performance of the duties, then, which I am discussing in these books, is called by the Stoics a sort of second-grade moral goodness, not the peculiar property of their wise men, but shared by them with all mankind.
Accordingly, such duties appeal to all men who have a natural disposition to virtue.
And when the two Decii or the two Scipios are mentioned as "brave men" or Fabricius or Aristides is called "the just," it is not at all that the former are quoted as perfect models of courage or the latter as a perfect model of justice, as if we had in one of them the ideal "wise man."
For no one of them was wise in the sense in which we wish to have "wise" understood; neither were Marcus Cato and Gaius Laelius wise, though they were so considered and were surnamed "the wise."
Not even the famous Seven were wise, But because of their constant observance of "mean" duties they bore a certain semblance and likeness to wise men.
For these reasons it is unlawful either to weigh true morality against conflicting expediency, or common morality, which is cultivated by those who wish to be considered good men, against what is profitable;
but we every-day people must observe and live up to that moral right which comes within the range of our comprehension as jealously as the truly wise men have to observe and live up to that which is morally right in the technical and true sense of the word.
For otherwise we cannot maintain such progress as we have made in the direction of virtue.
So much for those who have won a reputation for being good men by their careful observance of duty.
Those, on the other hand, who measure everything by a standard of profits and personal advantage and refuse to have these outweighed by considerations of moral rectitude are accustomed, in considering any question, to weigh the morally right against what they think the expedient; good men are not.
And so I believe that when Panaetius stated that people were accustomed to hesitate to do such weighing, he meant precisely what he said merely that "such was their custom," not that such was their duty.
And he gave it no approval; for it is most immoral to think more highly of the apparently expedient than of the morally right, or even to set these over against each other and to hesitate to choose between them.
What, then, is it that may sometimes give room for a doubt and seem to call for consideration?
It is, I believe, when a question arises as to the character of an action under consideration.
For it often happens, owing to exceptional circumstances, that what is accustomed under ordinary circumstances to be considered morally wrong is found not to be morally wrong.
For the sake of illustration, let us assume some particular case that admits of wider application: what more atrocious crime can there be than to kill a fellow-man, and especially an intimate friend?
But if anyone kills a tyrant be he never so intimate a friend he has not laden his soul with guilt, has he?
The Roman People, at all events, are not of that opinion; for of all glorious deeds they hold such an one to be the most noble.
Has expediency, then, prevailed over moral rectitude?
Not at all; moral rectitude has gone hand in hand with expediency.
Some general rule, therefore, should be laid down to enable us to decide without error, whenever what we call the expedient seems to clash with what we feel to be morally right; and, if we follow that rule in comparing courses of conduct, we shall never swerve from the path of duty.
That rule, moreover, shall be in perfect harmony with the Stoics' system and doctrines.
It is their teachings that I am following in these books, and for this reason: the older Academicians and your Peripatetics (who were once the same as the Academicians) give what is morally right the preference over what seems expedient; and yet the discussion of these problems, if conducted by those who consider whatever is morally right also expedient and nothing expedient that is not at the same time morally right, will be more illuminating than if conducted by those who think that something not expedient may be morally right and that something not morally right may be expedient.
But our New Academy allows us wide liberty, so that it is within my right to defend any theory that presents itself to me as most probable.
But to return to my rule.
Well then, for a man to take something from his neighbour and to profit by his neighbour's loss is more contrary to Nature than is death or poverty or pain or anything else that can affect either our person or our property.
For, in the first place, injustice is fatal to social life and fellowship between man and man.
For, if we are so disposed that each, to gain some personal profit, will defraud or injure his neighbour, then those bonds of human society, which are most in accord with Nature's laws, must of necessity be broken.
Suppose, by way of comparison, that each one of our bodily members should conceive this idea and imagine that it could be strong and well if it should draw off to itself the health and strength of its neighbouring member, the whole body would necessarily be enfeebled and die; so, if each one of us should seize upon the property of his neighbours and take from each whatever he could appropriate to his own use, the bonds of human society must inevitably be annihilated.
For, without any conflict with Nature's laws, it is granted that everybody may prefer to secure for himself rather than for his neighbour what is essential for the conduct of life; but Nature's laws do forbid us to increase our means, wealth, and resources by despoiling others.
But this principle is established not by Nature's laws alone (that is, by the common rules of equity), but also by the statutes of particular communities, in accordance with which in individual states the public interests are maintained.
In all these it is with one accord ordained that no man shall be allowed for the sake of his own advantage to injure his neighbour.
For it is to this that the laws have regard; this is their intent, that the bonds of union between citizens should not be impaired; and any attempt to destroy these bonds is repressed by the penalty of death, exile, imprisonment, or fine.
Again, this principle follows much more effectually directly from the Reason which is in Nature, which is the law of gods and men.
If anyone will hearken to that voice (and all will hearken to it who wish to live in accord with Nature's laws), he will never be guilty of coveting anything that is his neighbour's or of appropriating to himself what he has taken from his neighbour.
Then, too, loftiness and greatness of spirit, and courtesy, justice, and generosity are much more in harmony with Nature than are selfish pleasure, riches, and life itself; but it requires a great and lofty spirit to despise these latter and count them as naught, when one weighs them over against the common weal.
But for anyone to rob his neighbour for his own profit is more contrary to Nature than death, pain, and the like.
In like manner it is more in accord with Nature to emulate the great Hercules and undergo the greatest toil and trouble for the sake of aiding or saving the world, if possible, than to live in seclusion, not only free from all care, but revelling in pleasures and abounding in wealth, while excelling others also in beauty and strength; thus Hercules denied himself and underwent toil and tribulation for the world, and, out of gratitude for his services, popular belief has given him a place in the council of the gods.
The better and more noble, therefore, the character with which a man is endowed, the more does he prefer the life of service to the life of pleasure.
Whence it follows that man, if he is obedient to Nature, cannot do harm to his fellow-man.
Finally, if a man wrongs his neighbour to gain some advantage for himself, he must either imagine that he is not acting in defiance of Nature or he must believe that death, poverty, pain, or even the loss of children, kinsmen, or friends, is more to be shunned than an act of injustice against another.
If he thinks he is not violating the laws of Nature, when he wrongs his fellow-men, how is one to argue with the individual who takes away from man all that makes him man?
But if he believes that, while such a course should be avoided, the other alternatives are much worse namely, death, poverty, pain he is mistaken in thinking that any ills affecting either his person or his property are more serious than those affecting his soul.
This, then, ought to be the chief end of all men, to make the interest of each individual and of the whole body politic identical.
For, if the individual appropriates to selfish ends what should be devoted to the common good, all human fellowship will be destroyed.
And further, if Nature ordains that one man shall desire to promote the interests of a fellow-man, whoever he may be, just because he is a fellow-man, then it follows, in accordance with that same Nature, that there are interests that all men have in common.
And, if this is true, we are all subject to one and the same law of Nature; and, if this also is true, we are certainly forbidden by Nature's law to wrong our neighbour.
Now the first assumption is true; therefore the conclusion is likewise true.
For that is an absurd position which is taken by some people, who say that they will not rob a parent or a brother for their own gain, but that their relation to the rest of their fellow-citizens is quite another thing.
Such people contend in essence that they are bound to their fellow-citizens by no mutual obligations, social ties, or common interests.
This attitude demolishes the whole structure of civil society.
Others again who say that regard should be had for the rights of fellow-citizens, but not of foreigners, would destroy the universal brotherhood of mankind; and, when this is annihilated, kindness, generosity, goodness, and justice must utterly perish; and those who work all this destruction must be considered as wickedly rebelling against the immortal gods.
For they uproot the fellowship which the gods have established between human beings,
and the closest bond of this fellowship is the conviction that it is more repugnant to Nature for man to rob a fellow-man for his own gain than to endure all possible loss, whether to his property or to his person, or even to his very soul so far as these losses are not concerned with justice;
for this virtue is the sovereign mistress and queen of all the virtues.
But, perhaps, someone may say: "Well, then, suppose a wise man were starving to death, might he not take the bread of some perfectly useless member of society?"
Not at all; for my life is not more precious to me than that temper of soul which would keep me from doing wrong to anybody for my own advantage.
"Or again; supposing a righteous man were in a position to rob the cruel and inhuman tyrant Phalaris of clothing, might he not do it to keep himself from freezing to death?"
These cases are very easy to decide.
For, if merely for one's own benefit one were to take something away from a man, though he were a perfectly worthless fellow, it would be an act of meanness and contrary to Nature's law.
But suppose one would be able, by remaining alive, to render signal service to the state and to human society if from that motive one should take something from another, it would not be a matter for censure.
But, if such is not the case, each one must bear his own burden of distress rather than rob a neighbour of his rights.
We are not to say, therefore, that sickness or want or any evil of that sort is more repugnant to Nature than to covet and to appropriate what is one's neighbour's; but we do maintain that disregard of the common interests is repugnant to Nature; for it is unjust.
And therefore Nature's law itself, which protects and conserves human interests, will surely determine that a man who is wise, good, and brave, should in emergency have the necessaries of life transferred to him from a person who is idle and worthless; for the good man's death would be a heavy loss to the common weal; only let him beware that self-esteem and self-love do not find in such a transfer of possessions a pretext for wrong-doing.
But, thus guided in his decision, the good man will always perform his duty, promoting the general interests of human society on which I am so fond of dwelling.
As for the case of Phalaris, a decision is quite simple:
we have no ties of fellowship with a tyrant, but rather the bitterest feud; and it is not opposed to Nature to rob, if one can, a man whom it is morally right to kill; nay, all that pestilent and abominable race should be exterminated from human society.
And this may be done by proper measures; for, as certain members are amputated, if they show signs themselves of being bloodless and virtually lifeless and thus jeopardize the health of the other parts of the body, so those fierce and savage monsters in human form should be cut off from what may be called the common body of humanity.
Of this sort are all those problems in which we have to determine what moral duty is, as it varies with varying circumstances.
It is subjects of this sort that I believe Panaetius would have followed up, had not some accident or business interfered with his design.
For the elucidation of these very questions there are in his former books rules in plenty, from which one can learn what should be avoided because of its immorality and what does not have to be avoided for the reason that it is not immoral at all.
We are now putting the capstone, as it were, upon our structure, which is unfinished, to be sure, but still almost completed; and, as mathematicians make a practice of not demonstrating every proposition, but require that certain axioms be assumed as true, in order more easily to explain their meaning, so, my dear Cicero, I ask you to assume with me, if you can, that nothing is worth the seeking for its own sake except what is morally right.
But if Cratippus does not permit this assumption, you will still grant this at least that what is morally right is the object most worth the seeking for its own sake.
Either alternative is sufficient for my purposes; first the one and then the other seems to me the more probable; and, besides these, there no other alternative that seems probable at all.
In the first place, I must undertake the defence of Panaetius on this point; for he has said, not that the truly expedient could under certain circumstances clash with the morally right (for he could not have said that conscientiously), but only that what seemed expedient could do so.
For he often bears witness to the fact that nothing is really expedient that is not at the same time morally right, and nothing morally right that is not at the same time expedient; and he says that no greater curse has ever assailed human life than the doctrine of those who have separated these two conceptions.
And so he introduced an apparent, not a real, conflict between them, not to the end that we should under certain circumstances give the expedient preference over the moral, but that, in case they ever should get in each other's way, we might decide between them without uncertainty.
This part, therefore, which was passed over by Panaetius, I will carry to completion without any auxiliaries, but fighting my own battle, as the saying is.
For, of all that has been worked out on this line since the time of Panaetius, nothing that has come into my hands is at all satisfactory to me.
Now when we meet with expediency in some specious form or other, we cannot help being influenced by it.
But if upon closer inspection one sees that there is some immorality connected with what presents the appearance of expediency, then one is not necessarily to sacrifice expediency but to recognize that there can be no expediency where there is immorality.
But if there is nothing so repugnant to Nature as immorality (for Nature demands right and harmony and consistency and abhors their opposites), and if nothing is so thoroughly in accord with Nature as expediency, then surely expediency and immorality cannot coexist in one and the same object.
Again: if we are born for moral rectitude and if that is either the only thing worth seeking, as Zeno thought, or at least to be esteemed as infinitely outweighing everything else, as Aristotle holds, then it necessarily follows that the morally right is either the sole good or the supreme good.
Now, that which is good is certainly expedient; consequently, that which is morally right is also expedient.
Thus it is the error of men who are not strictly upright to seize upon something that seems to be expedient and straightway to dissociate that from the question of moral right.
To this error the assassin's dagger, the poisoned cup, the forged wills owe their origin; this gives rise to theft, embezzlement of public funds, exploitation and plundering of provincials and citizens; this engenders also the lust for excessive wealth, for despotic power, and finally for making oneself king even in the midst of a free people; and anything more atrocious or repulsive than such a passion cannot be conceived.
For with a false perspective they see the material rewards but not the punishment I do not mean the penalty of the law, which they often escape, but the heaviest penalty of all, their own demoralization.
Away, then, with questioners of this sort (for their whole tribe is wicked and ungodly), who stop to consider whether to pursue the course which they see is morally right or to stain their hands with what they know is crime.
For there is guilt in their very deliberation, even though they never reach the performance of the deed itself.
Those actions, therefore, should not be considered at all, the mere consideration of which is itself morally wrong.
Furthermore, in any such consideration we must banish any vain hope and thought that our action may be covered up and kept secret.
For if we have only made some real progress in the study of philosophy, we ought to be quite convinced that, even though we may escape the eyes of gods and men, we must still do nothing that savours of greed or of injustice, of lust or of intemperance.
By way of illustrating this truth Plato introduces the familiar story of Gyges: Once upon a time the earth opened in consequence of heavy rains; Gyges went down into the chasm and saw, so the story goes, a horse of bronze; in its side was a door.
On opening this door he saw the body of a dead man of enormous size with a gold ring upon his finger.
He removed this and put it on his own hand and then repaired to an assembly of the shepherds, for he was a shepherd of the king.
As often as he turned the bezel of the ring inwards toward the palm of his hand, he became invisible to everyone, while he himself saw everything; but as often as he turned it back to its proper position, he became visible again.
And so, with the advantage which the ring gave him, he debauched the queen, and with her assistance he murdered his royal master and removed all those who he thought stood in his way, without anyone's being able to detect him in his crimes.
Thus, by virtue of the ring, he shortly rose to be king of Lydia.
Now, suppose a wise man had just such a ring, he would not imagine that he was free to do wrong any more than if he did not have it; for good men aim to secure not secrecy but the right.
And yet on this point certain philosophers, who are not at all vicious but who are not very discerning, declare that the story related by Plato is fictitious and imaginary.
As if he affirmed that it was actually true or even possible!
But the force of the illustration of the ring is this: if nobody were to know or even to suspect the truth, when you do anything to gain riches or power or sovereignty or sensual gratification if your act should be hidden for ever from the knowledge of gods and men, would you do it?
The condition, they say, is impossible.
Of course it is.
But my question is, if that were possible which they declare to be impossible, what, pray, would one do?
They press their point with right boorish obstinacy: they assert that it is impossible and insist upon it; they refuse to see the meaning of my words, "if possible."
For when we ask what they would do, if they could escape detection, we are not asking whether they can escape detection; but we put them as it were upon the rack: should they answer that, if impunity were assured, they would do what was most to their selfish interest, that would be a confession that they are criminally minded; should they say that they would not do so, they would be granting that all things in and of themselves immoral should be avoided.
But let us now return to our theme.
Many cases oftentimes arise to perplex our minds with a specious appearance of expediency: the question raised in these cases is not whether moral rectitude is to be sacrificed to some considerable advantage (for that would of course be wrong), but whether the apparent advantage can be secured without moral wrong.
When Brutus deposed his colleague Collatinus from the consular office, his treatment of him might have been thought unjust; for Collatinus had been his associate, and had helped him with word and deed in driving out the royal family.
But when the leading men of the state had determined that all the kindred of Superbus and the very name of the Tarquins and every reminder of the monarchy should be obliterated, then the course that was expedient namely, to serve the country's interests was so pre-eminently right, that it was even Collatinus's own duty to acquiesce in its justice.
And so expediency gained the day because of its moral rightness; for without moral rectitude there could have been no possible expediency.
Not so in the case of the king who founded the city:
it was the specious appearance of expediency that actuated him; and when he decided that it was more expedient for him to reign alone than to share the throne with another, he slew his brother.
He threw to the winds his brotherly affection and his human feelings, to secure what seemed to him but was not expedient; and yet in defence of his deed he offered the excuse about his wall a specious show of moral rectitude, neither reasonable nor adequate at all.
He committed a crime, therefore, with due respect to him let me say so, be he Quirinus or Romulus.
And yet we are not required to sacrifice our own interests and surrender to others what we need for ourselves, but each one should consider his own interests, as far as he may without injury to his neighbour's.
When a man enters the foot-race, says Chrysippus with his usual aptness, "it is his duty to put forth all his strength and strive with all his might to win; but he ought never with his foot to trip, or with his hand to foul a competitor.
Thus in the stadium of life, it is not unfair for anyone to seek to obtain what is needful for his own advantage, but he has no right to wrest it from his neighbour."
It is in the case of friendships, however, that men's conceptions of duty are most confused; for it is a breach of duty either to fail to do for a friend what one rightly can do, or to do for him what is not right.
But for our guidance in all such cases we have a rule that is short and easy to master:
apparent advantages political preferment, riches, sensual pleasures, and the like should never be preferred to the obligations of friendship.
But an upright man will never for a friend's sake do anything in violation of his country's interests or his oath or his sacred honour, not even if he sits as judge in a friend's case; for he lays aside the role of friend when he assumes that of judge.
Only so far will he make concessions to friendship, that he will prefer his friend's side to be the juster one and that he will set the time for presenting his case, as far as the laws will allow, to suit his friend's convenience.
But when he comes to pronounce the verdict under oath, he should remember that he has God as his witness that is, as I understand it, his own conscience, than which God himself has bestowed upon man nothing more divine.
From this point of view it is a fine custom that we have inherited from our forefathers (if we were only true to it now), to appeal to the juror with this formula "to do what he can consistently with his sacred honour."
This form of appeal is in keeping with what I said a moment ago would be morally right for a judge to concede to a friend.
For supposing that we were bound to do everything that our friends desired, such relations would have to be accounted not friendships but conspiracies.
But I am speaking here of ordinary friendships; for among men who are ideally wise and perfect such situations cannot arise.
They say that Damon and Phintias, of the Pythagorean school, enjoyed such ideally perfect friendship, that when the tyrant Dionysius had appointed a day for the execution of one of them, and the one who had been condemned to death requested a few days' respite for the purpose of putting his loved ones in the care of friends, the other became surety for his appearance, with the understanding that if his friend did not return, he himself should be put to death.
And when the friend returned on the day appointed, the tyrant in admiration for their faithfulness begged that they would enrol him as a third partner in their friendship.
Well then, when we are weighing what seems to be expedient in friendship against what is morally right, let apparent expediency be disregarded and moral rectitude prevail;
and when in friendship requests are submitted that are not morally right, let conscience and scrupulous regard for the right take precedence of the obligations of friendship.
In this way we shall arrive at a proper choice between conflicting duties the subject of this part of our investigation.
Through a specious appearance of expediency wrong is very often committed in transactions between state and state, as by our own country in the destruction of Corinth.
A more cruel wrong was perpetrated by the Athenians in decreeing that the Aeginetans, whose strength lay in their navy, should have their thumbs cut off.
This seemed to be expedient; for Aegina was too grave a menace, as it was close to the Piraeus.
But no cruelty can be expedient; for cruelty is most abhorrent to human nature, whose lead we ought to follow.
They, too, do wrong who would debar foreigners from enjoying the advantages of their city and would exclude them from its borders, as was done by Pennus in the time of our fathers, and in recent times by Papius.
It may not be right, of course, for one who is not a citizen to exercise the rights and privileges of citizenship; and the law on this point was secured by two of our wisest consuls, Crassus and Scaevola.
Still, to debar foreigners from enjoying the advantages of the city is altogether contrary to the laws of humanity.
There are splendid examples in history where the apparent expediency of the state has been set at naught out of regard for moral rectitude.
Our own country has many instances to offer throughout her history, and especially in the Second Punic War, when news came of the disaster at Cannae, Rome displayed a loftier courage than ever she did in success; never a trace of faint-heartedness, never a mention of making terms.
The influence of moral right is so potent, that it eclipses the specious appearance of expediency.
When the Athenians could in no way stem the tide of the Persian invasion and determined to abandon their city, bestow their wives and children in safety at Troezen, embark upon their ships, and fight on the sea for the freedom of Greece, a man named Cyrsilus proposed that they should stay at home and open the gates of their city to Xerxes.
They stoned him to death for it.
And yet he was working for what he thought was expediency; but it was not not at all, for it clashed with moral rectitude.
After the victorious close of that war with Persia, Themistocles announced in the Assembly that he had a plan for the welfare of the state, but that it was not politic to let it be generally known.
He requested the people to appoint someone with whom he might discuss it.
They appointed Aristides.
Themistocles confided to him that the Spartan fleet, which had been hauled up on shore at Gytheum, could be secretly set on fire; this done, the Spartan power would inevitably be crushed.
When Aristides heard the plan, he came into the Assembly amid the eager expectation of all and reported that the plan proposed by Themistocles was in the highest degree expedient, but anything but morally right.
The result was that the Athenians concluded that what was not morally right was likewise not expedient, and at the instance of Aristides they rejected the whole proposition without even listening to it.
Their attitude was better than ours; for we let pirates go scot free, while we make our allies pay tribute.
Let it be set down as an established principle, then, that what is morally wrong can never be expedient not even when one secures by means of it that which one thinks expedient; for the mere act of thinking a course expedient, when it is morally wrong, is demoralizing.
But, as I said above, cases often arise in which expediency may seem to clash with moral rectitude; and so we should examine in carefully and see whether their conflict is inevitable or whether they may be reconciled.
The following are problems of this sort: suppose, for example, a time of dearth and famine at Rhodes, with provisions at fabulous prices; and suppose that an honest man has imported a large cargo of grain from Alexandria and that to his certain knowledge also several other importers have set sail from Alexandria, and that on the voyage he has sighted their vessels laden with grain and bound for Rhodes; is he to report the fact to the Rhodians or is he to keep his own counsel and sell his own stock at the highest market price?
I am assuming the case of a virtuous, upright man, and I am raising the question how a man would think and reason who would not conceal the facts from the Rhodians if he thought that it was immoral to do so, but who might be in doubt whether such silence would really be immoral.
In deciding cases of this kind Diogenes of Babylonia, a great and highly esteemed Stoic, consistently holds one view; his pupil Antipater, a most profound scholar, holds another.
According to Antipater all the facts should be disclosed, that the buyer may not be uninformed of any detail that the seller knows; according to Diogenes the seller should declare any defects in his wares, in so far as such a course is prescribed by the common law of the land; but for the rest, since he has goods to sell, he may try to sell them to the best possible advantage, provided he is guilty of no misrepresentation.
I have imported my stock, Diogenes's merchant will say; "I have offered it for sale; I sell at a price no higher than my competitors perhaps even lower, when the market is overstocked.
Who is wronged?"
"What say you?" comes Antipater's argument on the other side;
"it is your duty to consider the interests of your fellow-men and to serve society; you were brought into the world under these conditions and have these inborn principles which you are in duty bound to obey and follow, that your interest shall be the interest of the community and conversely that the interest of the community shall be your interest as well; will you, in view of all these facts, conceal from your fellow-men what relief in plenteous supplies is close at hand for them?"
It is one thing to conceal, Diogenes will perhaps reply; "not to reveal is quite a different thing.
At this present moment I am not concealing from you, even if I am not revealing to you, the nature of the gods or the highest good; and to know these secrets would be of more advantage to you than to know that the price of wheat was down.
But I am under no obligation to tell you everything that it may be to your interest to be told."
"Yea," Antipater will say, "but you are, as you must admit, if you will only bethink you of the bonds of fellowship forged by Nature and existing between man and man."
I do not forget them, the other will reply; "but do you mean to say that those bonds of fellowship are such that there is no such thing as private property?
If that is the case, we should not sell anything at all, but freely give everything away."
In this whole discussion, you see, no one says, "However wrong morally this or that may be, still, since it is expedient, I will do it"; but the one side asserts that a given act is expedient, without being morally wrong, while the other insists that the act should not be done, because it is morally wrong.
Suppose again that an honest man is offering a house for sale on account of certain undesirable features of which he himself is aware but which nobody else knows;
suppose it is unsanitary, but has the reputation of being healthful; suppose it is not generally known that vermin are to be found in all the bedrooms; suppose, finally, that it is built of unsound timber and likely to collapse, but that no one knows about it except the owner;
if the vendor does not tell the purchaser these facts but sells him the house for far more than he could reasonably have expected to get for it, I ask whether his transaction is unjust or dishonourable.
"Yes," says Antipater, "it is; for to allow a purchaser to be hasty in closing a deal and through mistaken judgment to incur a very serious loss, if this is not refusing ' to set a man right when he has lost his way' (a crime which at Athens is prohibited on pain of public execration), what is?
It is even worse than refusing to set a man on his way: it is deliberately leading a man astray."
Can you say, answers Diogenes, "that he compelled you to purchase, when he did not even advise it?
He advertised for sale what he did not like; you bought what you did like.
If people are not considered guilty of swindling when they place upon their placards FOR SALE: A FINE VILLA, WELL BUILT, even when it is neither good nor properly built, still less guilty are they who say nothing in praise of their house.
For where the purchaser may exercise his own judgment, what fraud can there be on the part of the vendor?
But if, again, not all that is expressly stated has to be made good, do you think a man is bound to make good what has not been said?
What, pray, would be more stupid than for a vendor to recount all the faults in the article he is offering for sale?
And what would be so absurd as for an auctioneer to cry, at the owner's bidding, 'Here is an unsanitary house for sale'?"
In this way, then, in certain doubtful cases moral rectitude is defended on the one side, while on the other side the case of expediency is so presented as to make it appear not only morally right to do what seems expedient, but even morally wrong not to do it.
This is the contradiction that seems often to arise between the expedient and the morally right.
But I must give my decision in these two cases; for I did not propound them merely to raise the questions, but to offer a solution.
I think, then, that it was the duty of that grain-dealer not to keep back the facts from the Rhodians, and of this vendor of the house to deal in the same way with his purchaser,
The fact is that merely holding one's peace about a thing does not constitute concealment, but concealment consists in trying for your own profit to keep others from finding out something that you know, when it is for their interest to know it.
And who fails to discern what manner of concealment that is and what sort of person would be guilty of it?
At all events he would be no candid or sincere or straightforward or upright or honest man, but rather one who is shifty, sly, artful, shrewd, underhand, cunning, one grown old in fraud and subtlety.
Is it not inexpedient to subject oneself to all these terms of reproach and many more besides?
If, then, they are to be blamed who suppress the truth, what are we to think of those who actually state what is false?
Gaius Canius, a Roman a man of considerable wit and literary culture, once went to Syracuse for a vacation, as he himself used to say, and not for business.
He gave out that he had a mind to purchase a little country seat, where he could invite his friends and enjoy himself, uninterrupted by troublesome visitors.
When this fact was spread abroad, one Pythius, a banker of Syracuse, informed him that he had such an estate; that it was not for sale, however, but Canius might make himself at home there, if he pleased; and at the same time he invited him to the estate to dinner next day.
Canius accepted.
Then Pythius, who, as might be expected of a moneylender, could command favours of all classes, called the fishermen together and asked them to do their fishing the next day out in front of his villa, and told them what he wished them to do.
Canius came to dinner at the appointed hour; Pythius had a sumptuous banquet prepared; there was a whole fleet of boats before their eyes; each fisherman brought in in turn the catch that he had made; and the fishes were deposited at the feet of Pythius.
"Pray, Pythius," said Canius thereupon, "what does this mean? all these fish? all these boats?"
No wonder, answered Pythius; "this is where all the fish in Syracuse are; here is where the fresh water comes from; the fishermen cannot get along without this estate."
Inflamed with desire for it, Canius insisted upon Pythius's selling it to him.
At first he demurred.
To make a long story short, Canius gained his point.
The man was rich, and, in his desire to own the country seat, he paid for it all that Pythius asked; and he bought the entire equipment, too.
Pythius entered the amount upon his ledger and completed the transfer.
The next day Canius invited his friends; he came early himself.
Not so much as a thole-pin was in sight.
He asked his next-door neighbour whether it was a fishermen's holiday, for not a sign of them did he see.
"Not so far as I know," said he; "but none are in the habit of fishing here.
And so I could not make out what was the matter yesterday."
Canius was furious; but what could he do?
For not yet had my colleague and friend, Gaius Aquilius, introduced the established forms to apply to criminal fraud.
When asked what he meant by "criminal fraud," as specified in these forms, he would reply:
"Pretending one thing and practising another a very felicitous definition, as one might expect from an expert in making them.
Pythius, therefore, and all others who do one thing while they pretend another are faithless, dishonest, and unprincipled scoundrels.
No act of theirs can be expedient, when what they do is tainted with so many vices.
But if Aquilius's definition is correct, pretence and concealment should be done away with in all departments of our daily life.
Then an honest man will not be guilty of either pretence or concealment in order to buy or to sell to better advantage.
Besides, your "criminal fraud" had previously been prohibited by the statutes: the penalty in the matter of trusteeships, for example, is fixed by the Twelve Tables; for the defrauding of minors, by the Plaetorian law.
The same prohibition is effective, without statutory enactment, in equity cases, in which it is added that the decision shall be "as good faith requires."
In all other cases in equity, moreover, the following phrases are most noteworthy: in a case calling for arbitration in the matter of a wife's dowry: what is "the fairer is the better"; in a suit for the restoration of a trust: "honest dealing, as between honest parties."
Pray, then, can there be any element of fraud in what is adjusted for the "better and fairer"?
Or can anything fraudulent or unprincipled be done, when "honest dealing between honest parties" is stipulated?
But "criminal fraud," as Aquilius says, consists in false pretence.
We must, therefore, keep misrepresentation entirely out of business transactions: the seller will not engage a bogus bidder to run prices up nor the buyer one to bid low against himself to keep them down; and each, if they come to naming a price, will state once for all what he will give or take.
Why, when Quintus Scaevola, the son of Publius Scaevola, asked that the price of a farm that he desired to purchase be definitely named and the vendor named it, he replied that he considered it worth more, and paid him , sesterces over and above what he asked.
No one could say that this was not the act of an honest man; but people do say that it was not the act of a worldly-wise man, any more than if he had sold for a smaller amount than he could have commanded.
Here, then, is that mischievous idea the world accounting some men upright, others wise;
and it is this fact that gives Ennius occasion to say: "In vain is the wise man wise, who cannot benefit himself.
And Ennius is quite right, if only he and I were agreed upon the meaning of "benefit."
Now I observe that Hecaton of Rhodes, a pupil of Panaetius, says in his books on "Moral Duty" dedicated to Quintus Tubero that "it is a wise man's duty to take care of his private interests, at the same time doing nothing contrary to the civil customs, laws, and institutions.
But that depends on our purpose in seeking prosperity; for we do not aim to be rich for ourselves alone but for our children, relatives, friends, and, above all, for our country.
For the private fortunes of individuals are the wealth of the state."
Hecaton could not for a moment approve of Scaevola's act, which I cited a moment ago; for he openly avows that he will abstain from doing for his own profit only what the law expressly forbids.
Such a man deserves no great praise nor gratitude.
Be that as it may, if both pretence and concealment constitute "criminal fraud," there are very few transactions into which "criminal fraud" does not enter; or, if he only is a good man who help all he can, and harms no one, it will certainly be no easy matter for us to find the good man as thus defined.
To conclude, then, it is never expedient to do wrong, because wrong is always immoral; and it is always expedient to be good, because goodness is always moral.
In the laws pertaining to the sale of real property it is stipulated in our civil code that when a transfer of any real estate is made, all its defects shall be declared as far as they are known to the vendor.
According to the laws of the Twelve Tables it used to be sufficient that such faults as had been expressly declared should be made good and that for any flaws which the vendor expressly denied, when questioned, he should be assessed double damages.
A like penalty for failure to make such declaration also has now been secured by our jurisconsults: they have decided that any defect in a piece of real estate, if known to the vendor but not expressly stated, must be made good by him.
For example, the augurs were proposing to take observations from the citadel and they ordered Tiberius Claudius Centumalus, who owned a house upon the Caelian Hill, to pull down such parts of the building as obstructed the augurs' view by reason of their height.
Claudius at once advertised his block for sale, and Publius Calpurnius Lanarius bought it.
The same notice was served also upon him.
And so, when Calpurnius had pulled down those parts of the building and discovered that Claudius had advertised it for sale only after the augurs had ordered them to be pulled down, he summoned the former owner before a court of equity to decide "what indemnity the owner was under obligation 'in good faith ' to pay and deliver to him."
The verdict was pronounced by Marcus Cato, the father of our Cato (for as other men receive a distinguishing name from their fathers, so he who bestowed upon the world so bright a luminary must have his distinguishing name from his son); he, as I was saying, was presiding judge and pronounced the verdict that "since the augurs' mandate was known to the vendor at the time of making the transfer and since he had not made it known, he was bound to make good the purchaser's loss."
With this verdict he established the principle that it was essential to good faith that any defect known to the vendor must be made known to the purchaser.
If his decision was right, our grain-dealer and the vendor of the unsanitary house did not do right to suppress the facts in those cases.
But the civil code cannot be made to include all cases where facts are thus suppressed; but those cases which it does include are summarily dealt with.
Marcus Marius Gratidianus, a kinsman of ours, sold back to Gaius Sergius Orata the house which he himself had bought a few years before from that same Orata.
It was subject to an encumbrance, but Marius had said nothing about this fact in stating the terms of sale.
The case was carried to the courts.
Crassus was counsel for Orata; Antonius was retained by Gratidianus.
Crassus pleaded the letter of the law that "the vendor was bound to make good the defect, for he had not declared it, although he was aware of it"; Antonius laid stress upon the equity of the case, pleading that, "inasmuch as the defect in question had not been unknown to Sergius (for it was the same house that he had sold to Marius), no declaration of it was needed, and in purchasing it back he had not been imposed upon, for he knew to what legal liability his purchase was subject."
What is the purpose of these illustrations?
To let you see that our forefathers did not countenance sharp practice.
Now the law disposes of sharp practices in one way, philosophers in another: the law deals with them as far as it can lay its strong arm upon them; philosophers, as far as they can be apprehended by reason and conscience.
Now reason demands that nothing be done with unfairness, with false pretence, or with misrepresentation.
Is it not deception, then, to set snares, even if one does not mean to start the game or to drive it into them?
Why, wild creatures often fall into snares undriven and unpursued.
Could one in the same way advertise a house for sale, post up a notice "To be sold," like a snare, and have somebody run into it unsuspecting?
Owing to the low ebb of public sentiment, such a method of procedure, I find, is neither by custom accounted morally wrong nor forbidden either by statute or by civil law; nevertheless it is forbidden by the moral law.
For there is a bond of fellowship although I have often made this statement, I must still repeat it again and again which has the very widest application, uniting all men together and each to each.
This bond of union is closer between those who belong to the same nation, and more intimate still between those who are citizens of the same city-state.
It is for this reason that our forefathers chose to understand one thing by the universal law and another by the civil law.
The civil law is not necessarily also the universal law; but the universal law ought to be also the civil law.
But we possess no substantial, life-like image of true Law and genuine Justice; a mere outline sketch is all that we enjoy.
I only wish that we were true even to this;
for, even as it is, it is drawn from the excellent models which Nature and Truth afford.
For how weighty are the words: "That I be not deceived and defrauded through you and my confidence in you"!
How precious are these: "As between honest people there ought to be honest dealing, and no deception"!
But who are "honest people," and what is "honest dealing" these are serious questions.
It was Quintus Scaevola, the pontifex maximus, who used to attach the greatest importance to all questions of arbitration to which the formula was appended "as good faith requires"; and he held that the expression "good faith" had a very extensive application, for it was employed in trusteeships and partnerships, in trusts and commissions, in buying and selling, in hiring and letting in a word, in all the transactions on which the social relations of daily life depend; in these, he said, it required a judge of great ability to decide the extent of each individual's obligation to the other, especially when counter-claims were admissible in most cases.
Away, then, with sharp practice and trickery, which desires, of course, to pass for wisdom, but is far from it and totally unlike it.
For the function of wisdom is to discriminate between good and evil; whereas, inasmuch as all things morally wrong are evil, trickery prefers the evil to the good.
It is not only in the case of real estate transfers that the civil law, based upon a natural feeling for the right, punishes trickery and deception, but also in the sale of slaves every form of deception on the vendor's part is disallowed.
For by the aediles' ruling the vendor is answerable for any deficiency in the slave he sells, for he is supposed to know if his slave is sound, or if he is a runaway, or a thief.
The case of those who have just come into the possession of slaves by inheritance is different.
From this we come to realize that since Nature is the source of right, it is not in accord with Nature that anyone should take advantage of his neighbour's ignorance.
And no greater curse in life can be found than knavery that wears the mask of wisdom.
Thence come those countless cases in which the expedient seems to conflict with the right.
For how few will be found who can refrain from wrong-doing, if assured of the power to keep it an absolute secret and to run no risk of punishment!
Let us put our principle to the test, if you please, and see if it holds good in those instances in which, perhaps, the world in general finds no wrong;
for in this connection we do not need to discuss cut-throats, poisoners, forgers of wills, thieves, and embezzlers of public moneys, who should be repressed not by lectures and discussions of philosophers, but by chains and prison walls; but let us study here the conduct of those who have the reputation of being honest men.
Certain individuals brought from Greece to Rome a forged will, purporting to be that of the wealthy Lucius Minucius Basilus.
The more easily to procure validity for it, they made joint-heirs with themselves two of the most influential men of the day, Marcus Crassus and Quintus Hortensius.
Although these men suspected that the will was a forgery, still, as they were conscious of no personal guilt in the matter, they did not spurn the miserable boon procured through the crime of others.
What shall we say, then?
Is this excuse competent to acquit them of guilt?
I cannot think so, although I loved the one while he lived, and do not hate the other now that he is dead.
Be that as it may, Basilus had in fact desired that his nephew Marcus Satrius should bear his name and inherit his property.
(I refer to the Satrius who is the present patron of Picenum and the Sabine country and oh, what a shameful stigma it is upon the times!) And therefore it was not right that two of the leading citizens of Rome should take the estate and Satrius succeed to nothing except his uncle's name.
For if he does wrong who does not ward off and repel injury when he can as I explained in the course of the First Book what is to be thought of the man who not only does not try to prevent wrong, but actually aids and abets it?
For my part, I do not believe that even genuine legacies are moral, if they are sought after by designing flatteries and by attentions hypocritical rather than sincere.
And yet in such cases there are times when one course is likely to appear expedient and another morally right.
The appearance is deceptive; for our standard is the same for expediency and for moral rectitude.
And the man who does not accept the truth of this will be capable of any sort of dishonesty, any sort of crime.
For if he reasons, "That is, to be sure, the right course, but this course brings advantage," he will not hesitate in his mistaken judgment to divorce two conceptions that Nature has made one; and that spirit opens the door to all sorts of dishonesty, wrong-doing, and crime.
Suppose, then, that a good man had such power that at a snap of his fingers his name could steal into rich men's wills, he would not avail himself of that power no, not even though he could be perfectly sure that no one would ever suspect it.
Suppose, on the other hand, that one were to offer a Marcus Crassus the power, by the mere snapping of his fingers, to get himself named as heir, when he was not really an heir, he would, I warrant you, dance in the forum.
But the righteous man, the one whom we feel to be a good man, would never rob anyone of anything to enrich himself.
If anybody is astonished at this doctrine, let him confess that he does not know what a good man is.
If, on the other hand, anyone should desire to unfold the idea of a good man which lies wrapped up in his own mind, he would then at once make it clear to himself that a good man is one who helps all whom he can and harms nobody, unless provoked by wrong.
What shall we say, then?
Would he not be doing harm who by a kind of magic spell should succeed in displacing the real heirs to an estate and pushing himself into their place?
Well, someone may say, "is he not to do what is expedient, what is advantageous to himself?"
Nay, verily; he should rather be brought to realize that nothing that is unjust is either advantageous or expedient; if he does not learn this lesson, it will never be possible for him to be a "good man."
When I was a boy, I used to hear my father tell that Gaius Fimbria, an ex-consul, was judge in a case of Marcus Lutatius Pinthia, a Roman knight of irreproachable character.
On that occasion Pinthia had laid a wager to be forfeited "if he did not prove in court that he was a good man."
Fimbria declared that he would never render a decision in such a case, for fear that he might either rob a reputable man of his good name, if he decided against him, or be thought to have pronounced someone a good man, when such a character is, as he said, established by the performance of countless duties and the possession of praiseworthy qualities without number.
To this type of good man, then, known not only to a Socrates but even to a Fimbria, nothing can possibly seem expedient that is not morally right.
Such a man, therefore, will never venture to think to say nothing of doing anything that he would not dare openly to proclaim.
Is it not a shame that philosophers should be in doubt about moral questions on which even peasants have no doubts at all?
For it is with peasants that the proverb, already trite with age, originated:
when they praise a man's honour and honesty, they say, "He is a man with whom you can safely play at odd and even in the dark."
What is the point of the proverb but this that what is not proper brings no advantage, even if you can gain your end without anyone's being able to convict you of wrong?
Do you not see that in the light of this proverb no excuse is available either for the Gyges of the story or for the man who I assumed a moment ago could with a snap of his fingers sweep together everybody's inheritance at once?
For as the morally wrong cannot by any possibility be made morally right, however successfully it may be covered up, so what is not morally right cannot be made expedient, for Nature refuses and resists.
But stay, someone will object, "when the prize is very great, there is excuse for doing wrong."
Gaius Marius had been left in obscurity for more than six whole years after his praetorship and had scarcely the remotest hope of gaining the consulship.
It looked as if he would never even be a candidate for that office.
He was now a lieutenant under Quintus Metellus, who sent him on a furlough to Rome.
There before the Roman People he accused his own general, an eminent man and one of our first citizens, of purposely protracting the war and declared that if they would make him consul, he would within a short time deliver Jugurtha alive or dead into the hands of the Roman People.
And so he was elected consul, it is true, but he was a traitor to his own good faith and to justice; for by a false charge he subjected to popular disfavour an exemplary and highly respected citizen, and that too, although he was his lieutenant and under leave of absence from him.
Evea our kinsman Gratidianus failed on one occasion to perform what would be a good man's duty: in his praetorship the tribunes of the people summoned the college of praetors to council, in order to adopt by joint resolution a standard of value for our currency; for at that time the value of money was so fluctuating that no one could tell how much he was worth.
In joint session they drafted an ordinance, defining the penalty and the methods of procedure in cases of violation of the ordinance, and agreed that they should all appear together upon the rostra in the afternoon to publish it.
And while all the rest withdrew, some in one direction, some in another, Marius (Gratidianus) went straight from the council-chamber to the rostra and published individually what had been drawn up by all together.
And that coup, if you care to know, brought him vast honour; in every street statues of him were erected; before these incense and candles burned.
In a word, no one ever enjoyed greater popularity with the masses.
It is such cases as these that sometimes perplex us in our consideration, when the point in which justice is violated does not seem so very significant, but the consequences of such slight transgression seem exceedingly important.
For example, it was not so very wrong morally, in the eyes of Marius, to overreach his colleagues and the tribunes in turning to himself alone all the credit with the people; but to secure by that means his election to the consulship, which was then the goal of his ambition, seemed very greatly to his interest.
But for all cases we have one rule, with which I desire you to be perfectly familiar: that which seems expedient must not be morally wrong; or, if it is morally wrong, it must not seem expedient.
What follows?
Can we account either the great Marius or our Marius Gratidianus a good man?
Work out your own ideas and sift your thoughts so as to see what conception and idea of a good man they contain.
Pray, tell me, does it coincide with the character of your good man to lie for his own profit, to slander, to overreach, to deceive?
Nay, verily; anything but that!
Is there, then, any object of such value or any advantage so worth the winning that, to gain it, one should sacrifice the name of a "good man" and the lustre of his reputation?
What is there that your so-called expediency can bring to you that will compensate for what it can take away, if it steals from you the name of a "good man" and causes you to lose your sense of honour and justice?
For what difference does it make whether a man is actually transformed into a beast or whether, keeping the outward appearance of a man, he has the savage nature of a beast within?
Again, when people disregard everything that is morally right and true, if only they may secure power thereby, are they not pursuing the same course as he who wished to have as a father-inlaw the man by whose effrontery he might gain power for himself?
He thought it advantageous to secure supreme power while the odium of it fell upon another; and he failed to see how unjust to his country this was, and how wrong morally.
But the father-in-law himself used to have continually upon his lips the Greek verses from the Phoenissae, which I will reproduce as well as I can awkwardly, it may be, but still so that the meaning can be understood:
If wrong may e'er be right, for a throne's sake Were wrong most right: be God in all else feared!
Our tyrant deserved his death for having made an exception of the one thing that was the blackest crime of all.
Why do we gather instances of petty crime legacies criminally obtained and fraudulent buying and selling?
Behold, here you have a man who was ambitious to be king of the Roman People and master of the whole world; and he achieved it!
The man who maintains that such an ambition is morally right is a madman; for he justifies the destruction of law and liberty and thinks their hideous and detestable suppression glorious.
But if anyone agrees that it is not morally right to be kind in a state that once was free and that ought to be free now, and yet imagines that it is advantageous for him who can reach that position, with what remonstrance or rather with what appeal should I try to tear him away from so strange a delusion?
For, oh ye immortal gods!
can the most horrible and hideous of all murders that of fatherland bring advantage to anybody, even though he who has committed such a crime receives from his enslaved fellow-citizens the title of "Father of his Country"?
Expediency, therefore, must be measured by the standard of moral rectitude, and in such a way, too, that these two words shall seem in sound only to be different but in real meaning to be one and the same.
What greater advantage one could have, according to the standard of popular opinion, than to be a king, I do not know; when, however, I begin to bring the question back to the standard of truth, then I find nothing more disadvantageous for one who has risen to that height by injustice.
For can occasions for worry, anxiety, fear by day and by night, and a life all beset with plots and perils be of advantage to anybody?
"Thrones have many foes and friends untrue, but few devoted friends, says Accius.
But of what sort of throne was he speaking?
Why, one that was held by right, handed down from Tantalus and Pelops.
Aye, but how many more foes, think you, had that king who with the Roman People's army brought the Roman People themselves into subjection and compelled a state that not only had been free but had been mistress of the world to be his slave?
What stains do you think he had upon his conscience, what scars upon his heart?
But whose life can be advantageous to himself, if that life is his on the condition that the man who takes it shall be held in undying gratitude and glory?
But if these things which seem so very advantageous are not advantageous because they are full of shame and moral wrong, we ought to be quite convinced that nothing can be expedient that is not morally right.
And yet this very question has been decided on many occasions before and since; but in the war with Pyrrhus the decision rendered by Gaius Fabricius, in his second consulship, and by our senate was particularly striking.
Without provocation King Pyrrhus had declared war upon the Roman People; the struggle was against a generous and powerful prince, and the supremacy of power was the prize; a deserter came over from him to the camp of Fabricius and promised, if Fabricius would assure him of a reward, to return to the camp of Pyrrhus as secretly as he had come, administer poison to the king, and bring about his death.
Fabricius saw to it that this fellow was taken back to Pyrrhus; and his action was commended by the senate.
And yet, if the mere show of expediency and the popular conception of it are all we want, this one deserter would have put an end to that wasting war and to a formidable foe of our supremacy; but it would have been a lasting shame and disgrace to us to have overcome not by valour but by crime the man with whom we had a contest for glory.
Which course, then, was more expedient for Fabricius, who was to our city what Aristides was to Athens, or for our senate, who never divorced expediency from honour to contend against the enemy with the sword or with poison?
If supremacy is to be sought for the sake of glory, crime should be excluded, for there can be no glory in crime;
but if it is power for its own sake that is sought, whatever the price, it cannot be expedient if it is linked with shame.
That well-known measure, therefore, introduced by Philippus, the son of Quintus, was not expedient.
With the authority of the senate, Lucius Sulla had exempted from taxation certain states upon receipt of a lump sum of money from them.
Philippus proposed that they should again be reduced to the condition of tributary states, without repayment on our part of the money that they had paid for their exemption.
And the senate accepted his proposal.
Shame upon our government!
The pirates' sense of honour is higher than the senate's.
But, someone will say, "the revenues were increased, and therefore it was expedient."
How long will people venture to say that a thing that is not morally right can be expedient?
Furthermore, can hatred and shame be expedient for any government? For government ought to be founded upon fair fame and the loyalty of allies.
On this point I often disagreed even with my friend Cato; it seemed to me that he was too rigorous in his watchful care over the claims of the treasury and the revenues; he refused everything that the farmers of the revenue asked for and much that the allies desired; whereas, as I insisted, it was our duty to be generous to the allies and to treat the publicans as we were accustomed individually to treat our tenants and all the more, because harmony between the orders was essential to the welfare of the republic.
Curio, too, was wrong, when he pleaded that the demands of the people beyond the Po were just, but never failed to add, "Let expediency prevail."
He ought rather to have proved that the claims were not just, because they were not expedient for the republic, than to have admitted that they were just, when, as he maintained, they were not expedient.
The sixth book of Hecaton's "Moral Duties" is full of questions like the following: "Is it consistent with a good man's duty to let his slaves go hungry when provisions are at famine prices?"
Hecaton gives the argument on both sides of the question; but still in the end it is by the standard of expediency, as he conceives it, rather than by one of human feeling, that he decides the question of duty.
Then he raises this question: supposing a man had to throw part of his cargo overboard in a storm, should he prefer to sacrifice a high-priced horse or a cheap and worthless slave?
In this case regard for his property interest inclines him one way, human feeling the other.
Suppose that a foolish man has seized hold of a plank from a sinking ship, shall a wise man wrest it away from him if he can?
No, says Hecaton; "for that would be unjust."
"But how about the owner of the ship? Shall he take the plank away because it belongs to him?"
Not at all; no more than he would be willing when far out at sea to throw a passenger overboard on the ground that the ship was his."
For until they reach the place for which the ship is chartered, she belongs to the passengers, not to the owner."
"Again; suppose there were two to be saved from the sinking ship both of them wise men and only one small plank, should both seize it to save themselves? Or should one give place to the other?"
Why of course, one should give place to the other, but that other must be the one whose life is more valuable either for his own sake or for that of his country.
But what if these considerations are of equal weight in both?
Then there will be no contest, but one will give place to the other, as if the point were decided by lot or at a game of odd and even.
Again, suppose a father were robbing temples or making underground passages to the treasury, should a son inform the officers of it?
Nay; that were a crime; rather should he defend his father, in case he were indicted.
Well, then, are not the claims of country paramount to all other duties?
"Aye, verily; but it is to our country's interest to have citizens who are loyal to their parents."
But once more if the father attempts to make himself king, or to betray his country, shall the son hold his peace?
Nay, verily; he will plead with his father not to do so."
If that accomplishes nothing, he will take him to task; he will even threaten; and in the end, if things point to the destruction of the state, he will sacrifice his father to the safety of his country."
Again, he raises the question: "If a wise man should inadvertently accept counterfeit money for good, will he offer it as genuine in payment of a debt after he discovers his mistake?"
Diogenes says, "Yes"; Antipater, "No," and I agree with him.
If a man knowingly offers for sale wine that is spoiling, ought he to tell his customers?
Diogenes thinks that it is not required; Antipater holds that an honest man would do so.
These are like so many points of the law disputed among the Stoics.
In selling a slave, should his faults be declared not those only which the seller is bound by the civil law to declare or have the slave returned to him, but also the fact that he is untruthful, or disposed to gamble, or steal, or get drunk?
The one thinks such facts should be declared, the other does not.
"If a man thinks that he is selling brass, when he is actually selling gold, should an upright man inform him that his stuff is gold, or go on buying for one shilling what is worth a thousand?"
It is clear enough by this time what my views are on these questions, and what are the grounds of dispute between the above-named philosophers.
The question arises also whether agreements and promises must always be kept, "when," in the language of the praetors' edicts, "they have not been secured through force or criminal fraud."
If one man gives another a remedy for the dropsy, with the stipulation that, if he is cured by it, he shall never make use of it again; suppose the patient's health is restored by the use of it, but some years later he contracts the same disease once more; and suppose he cannot secure from the man with whom he made the agreement permission to use the remedy again, what should he do?
Since the man is unfeeling in refusing the request, and since no harm could be done to him by his friend's using the remedy, the sick man is justified in doing what he can for his own life and health.
Again: suppose that a millionaire is making some wise man his heir and leaving him in his will a hundred million sesterces; and suppose that he has asked the wise man, before he enters upon his inheritance, to dance publicly in broad daylight in the forum; and suppose that the wise man has given his promise to do so, because the rich man would not leave him his fortune on any other condition; should he keep his promise or not?
I wish he had made no such promise; that, I think, would have been in keeping with his dignity.
But, seeing that he has made it, it will be morally better for him, if he believes it morally wrong to dance in the forum, to break his promise and refuse to accept his inheritance rather than to keep his promise and accept it unless, perhaps, he contributes the money to the state to meet some grave crisis.
In that case, to promote thereby the interests of one's country, it would not be morally wrong even to dance, if you please, in the forum.
No more binding are those promises which are inexpedient for the persons themselves to whom they have been given.
To go back to the realm of story, the sungod promised his son Phaethon to do for him whatever he should wish.
His wish was to be allowed to ride in his father's chariot.
It was granted.
And before he came back to the ground he was consumed by a stroke of lightning.
How much better had it been, if in his case the father's promise had not been kept.
And what of that promise, the fulfilment of which Theseus required from Neptune?
When Neptune offered him three wishes, he wished for the death of his son Hippolytus, because the father was suspicious of the son's relations with his step-mother.
And when this wish was granted, Theseus was overwhelmed with grief.
And once more; when Agamemnon had vowed to Diana the most beautiful creature born that year within his realm, he was brought to sacrifice Iphigenia; for in that year nothing was born more beautiful than she.
He ought to have broken his vow rather than commit so horrible a crime.
Promises are, therefore, sometimes not to be kept; and trusts are not always to be restored.
Suppose that a person leaves his sword with you when he is in his right mind, and demands it back in a fit of insanity; it would be criminal to restore it to him; it would be your duty not to do so.
Again, suppose that a man who has entrusted money to you proposes to make war upon your common country, should you restore the trust?
I believe you should not; for you would be acting against the state, which ought to be the dearest thing in the world to you.
Thus there are many things which in and of themselves seem morally right, but which under certain circumstances prove to be not morally right: to keep a promise, to abide by an agreement, to restore a trust may, with a change of expediency, cease to be morally right.
With this I think I have said enough about those actions which masquerade as expedient under the guise of prudence, while they are really contrary to justice.
Since, however, in Book One we derived moral duties from the four sources of moral rectitude, let us continue the same fourfold division here in pointing out how hostile to virtue are those courses of conduct which seem to be, but really are not, expedient.
We have discussed wisdom, which cunning seeks to counterfeit, and likewise justice, which is always expedient.
There remain for our discussion two divisions of moral rectitude, the one of which is discernible in the greatness and pre-eminence of a superior soul, the other, in the shaping and regulation of it by temperance and self-control.
Ulysses thought his ruse expedient, as the tragic poets, at least, have represented him.
In Homer, our most reliable authority, no such suspicion is cast upon him; but the tragedies charge him with trying to escape a soldier's service by feigning madness.
The trick was not morally right, but, someone may perhaps say, "It was expedient for him to keep his throne and live at ease in Ithaca with parents, wife, and son.
Do you think that there is any glory in facing daily toil and danger that can be compared with a life of such tranquillity?"
Nay; I think that tranquillity at such a price is to be despised and rejected; for if it is not morally right, neither is it expedient.
For what do you think would have been said of Ulysses, if he had persisted in that pretended madness, seeing that, notwithstanding his deeds of heroism in the war, he was nevertheless upbraided by Ajax thus:
"Twas he himself who first proposed the oath; ye all Do know;
yet he alone of all his vow did break;
He feigned persistently that he was mad, that thus He might not have to join the host.
And had not then Palamedes, shrewd and wise, his tricky impudence Unmasked, he had evaded e'en for aye his vow.
Nay, for him it had been better to battle not only with the enemy but also with the waves, as he did, than to desert Greece when she was united for waging the war against the barbarians.
But let us leave illustrations both from story and from foreign lands and turn to real events in our own history.
Marcus Atilius Regulus in his second consulship was taken prisoner in Africa by the stratagem of Xanthippus, a Spartan general serving under the command of Hannibal's father Hamilcar.
He was sent to the senate on parole, sworn to return to Carthage himself, if certain noble prisoners of war were not restored to the Carthaginians.
When he came to Rome, he could not fail to see the specious appearance of expediency, but he decided that it was unreal, as the outcome proves.
His apparent interest was to remain in his own country, to stay at home with his wife and children, and to retain his rank and dignity as an ex-consul, regarding the defeat which he had suffered as a misfortune that might come to anyone in the game of war.
Who says that this was not expedient?
Who, think you?
Greatness of soul and courage say that it was not.
Can you ask for more competent authorities?
The denial comes from those virtues, for it is characteristic of them to await nothing with fear, to rise superior to all the vicissitudes of earthly life, and to count nothing intolerable that can befall a human being.
What, then, did he do?
He came into the senate and stated his mission; but he refused to give his own vote on the question; for, he held, he was not a member of the senate so long as he was bound by the oath sworn to his enemies.
And more than that, he said "What a foolish fellow," someone will say, "to oppose his own best interests" he said that it was not expedient that the prisoners should be returned; for they were young men and gallant officers, while he was already bowed with age.
And when his counsel prevailed, the prisoners were retained and he himself returned to Carthage; affection for his country and his family failed to hold him back.
And even then he was not ignorant of the fact that he was going to a most cruel enemy and to exquisite torture; still, he thought his oath must be sacredly kept.
And so even then, when he was being slowly put to death by enforced wakefulness, he enjoyed a happier lot than if he had remained at home an aged prisoner of war, a man of consular rank forsworn.
"But," you will say, "it was foolish of him not only not to advocate the exchange of prisoners but even to plead against such action."
How was it foolish?
Was it so, even if his policy was for the good of the state?
Nay; can what is inexpedient for the state be expedient for any individual citizen?
People overturn the fundamental principles established by Nature, when they divorce expediency from moral rectitude.
For we all seek to obtain what is to us expedient; we are irresistibly drawn toward it, and we cannot possibly be otherwise.
For who is there that would turn his back upon what is to him expedient?
Or rather, who is there that does not exert himself to the utmost to secure it?
But because we cannot discover it anywhere except in good report, propriety, and moral rectitude, we look upon these three for that reason as the first and the highest objects of endeavour, while what we term expediency we account not so much an ornament to our dignity as a necessary incident to living.
"What significance, then," someone will say, "do we attach to an oath?
It is not that we fear the wrath of Jove, is it?
Not at all; it is the universally accepted view of all philosophers that God is never angry, never hurtful.
This is the doctrine not only of those who teach that God is Himself free from troubling cares and that He imposes no trouble upon others, but also of those who believe that God is ever working and ever directing His world.
Furthermore, suppose Jupiter had been wroth, what greater injury could He have inflicted upon Regulus than Regulus brought upon himself?
Religious scruple, therefore, had no such preponderance as to outweigh so great expediency."
"Or was he afraid that his act would be morally wrong?
'Of evils choose the least.'
Did that moral wrong, then, really involve as great an evil as did that awful torture?
And secondly, there are the lines of Accius:
'Hast thou broke thy faith?'
'None have I giv'n; none give I ever to the faithless.'
Although this sentiment is put into the mouth of a wicked king, still it is illuminating in its correctness."
Their third argument is this: just as we maintain that some things seem expedient but are not, so they maintain, some things seem morally right but, are not.
For example, they contend, "in this very case it seems morally right for Regulus to have returned to torture for the sake of being true to his oath.
But it proves not to be morally right, because what an enemy extorted by force ought not to have been binding."
As their concluding argument, they add: whatever is highly expedient may prove to be morally right, even if it did not seem so in advance.
These are in substance the arguments raised against the conduct of Regulus.
Let us consider them each in turn.
He need not have been afraid that Jupiter in anger would inflict injury upon him; he is not wont to be angry or hurtful.
This argument, at all events, has no more weight against Regulus's conduct than it has against the keeping of any other oath.
But in taking an oath it is our duty to consider not what one may have to fear in case of violation but wherein its obligation lies: an oath is an assurance backed by religious sanctity; and a solemn promise given, as before God as one's witness, is to be sacredly kept.
For the question no longer concerns the wrath of the gods (for there is no such thing) but the obligations of justice and good faith.
For, as Ennius says so admirably: "Gracious Good Faith, on wings upborne;	thou oath in Jupiter's great name!
Whoever, therefore, violates his oath violates Good Faith; and, as we find it stated in Cato's speech, our forefathers chose that she should dwell upon the Capitol "neighbour to Jupiter Supreme and Best."
"But," objection was further made, "even if Jupiter had been angry, he could not have inflicted greater injury upon Regulus than Regulus brought upon himself."
Quite true, if there is no evil except pain.
But philosophers of the highest authority assure us that pain is not only not the supreme evil but no evil at all.
And pray do not disparage Regulus, as no unimportant witness nay, I am rather inclined to think he was the very best witness to the truth of their doctrine.
For what more competent witness do we ask for than one of the foremost citizens of Rome, who voluntarily faced torture for the sake of being true to his moral duty?
Again, they say, "Of evils choose the least" that is, shall one "choose moral wrong rather than misfortune," or is there any evil greater than moral wrong?
For if physical deformity excites a certain amount of aversion, how offensive ought the deformity and hideousness of a demoralized soul to seem!
Therefore, those who discuss these problems with more rigour make bold to say that moral wrong is the only evil, while those who treat them with more laxity do not hesitate to call it the supreme evil.
Once more, they quote the sentiment: "None have I given, none give I ever to the faithless.
It was proper for the poet to say that, because, when he was working out his Atreus, he had to make the words fit the character.
But if they mean to adopt it as a principle, that a pledge given to the faithless is no pledge, let them look to it that it be not a mere loophole for perjury that they seek.
Furthermore, we have laws regulating warfare, and fidelity to an oath must often be observed in dealings with an enemy:
for an oath sworn with the clear understanding in one's own mind that it should be performed must be kept; but if there is no such understanding, it does not count as perjury if one does not perform the vow.
For example, suppose that one does not deliver the amount agreed upon with pirates as the price of one's life, that would be accounted no deception not even if one should fail to deliver the ransom after having sworn to do so;
for a pirate is not included in the number of lawful enemies, but is the common foe of all the world; and with him there ought not to be any pledged word nor any oath mutually binding.
For swearing to what is false is not necessarily perjury, but to take an oath "upon your conscience," as it is expressed in our legal formulas, and then fail to perform it, that is perjury.
For Euripides aptly says: "My tongue has sworn; the mind I have has sworn no oath.
But Regulus had no right to confound by perjury the terms and covenants of war made with an enemy.
For the war was being carried on with a legitimate, declared enemy; and to regulate our dealings with such an enemy, we have our whole fetial code as well as many other laws that are binding in common between nations.
Were this not the case, the senate would never have delivered up illustrious men of ours in chains to the enemy.
And yet Titus Veturius and Spurius Postumius in their second consulship lost the battle at the Caudine Forks, and our legions were sent under the yoke.
And because they made peace with the Samnites, those generals were delivered up to them, for they had made the peace without the approval of the people and senate.
And Tiberius Numicius and Quintus Maelius, tribunes of the people, were delivered up at the same time, because it was with their sanction that the peace had been concluded.
This was done in order that the peace with the Samnites might be annulled.
And Postumius, the very man whose delivery was in question, was the proposer and advocate of the said delivery.
Many years later, Gaius Mancinus had a similar experience: he advocated the bill, introduced in accordance with a decree of the senate by Lucius Furius and Sextus Atilius, that he should be delivered up to the Numantines, with whom he had made a treaty without authorization from the senate;
and when the bill was passed, he was delivered up to the enemy.
His action was more honourable than Quintus Pompey's; Pompey's situation was identical with his, and yet at his own entreaty the bill was rejected.
In this latter case, apparent expediency prevailed over moral rectitude; in the former cases, the false semblance of expediency was overbalanced by the weight of moral rectitude.
"But, an oath extorted by force ought not to have been binding."
As if force could be brought to bear upon a brave man!
Why, then, did he make the journey to the senate, especially when he intended to plead against the surrender of the prisoners of war?
Therein you are criticizing what is the noblest feature of his conduct.
For he was not content to stand upon his own judgment but took up the case, in order that the judgment might be that of the senate; and had it not been for the weight of his pleading, the prisoners would certainly have been restored to the Carthaginians; and in that case, Regulus would have remained safe at home in his country.
But because he thought this not expedient for his country, he believed that it was therefore morally right for him to declare his conviction and to suffer for it.
When they argued also that what is highly expedient may prove to be morally right, they ought rather to say not that it "may prove to be" but that it actually is morally right.
For nothing can be expedient which is not at the same time morally right; neither can a thing be morally right just because it is expedient, but it is expedient because it is morally right.
From the many splendid examples in history, therefore, we could not easily point to one either more praiseworthy or more heroic than the conduct of Regulus.
But of all that is thus praiseworthy in the conduct of Regulus, this one feature above all others calls for our admiration: it was he who offered the motion that the prisoners of war be retained.
For the fact of his returning may seem admirable to us nowadays, but in those times he could not have done otherwise.
That merit, therefore, belongs to the age, not to the man.
For our ancestors were of the opinion that no bond was more effective in guaranteeing good faith than an oath.
That is clearly proved by the laws of the Twelve Tables, by the "sacred" laws, by the treaties in which good faith is pledged even to the enemy, by the investigations made by the censors and the penalties imposed by them; for there were no cases in which they used to render more rigorous decisions than in cases of violation of an oath.
Marcus Pomponius, a tribune of the people, brought an indictment against Lucius Manlius, Aulus's son, for having extended the term of his dictatorship a few days beyond its expiration.
He further charged him with having banished his own son Titus (afterward surnamed Torquatus) from all companionship with his fellow-men, and with requiring him to live in the country.
When the son, who was then a young man, heard that his father was in trouble on his account, he hastened to Rome so the story goes and at daybreak presented himself at the house of Pomponius.
The visitor was announced to Pomponius;Inasmuch as he thought that the son in his anger meant to bring him some new evidence to use against the father, he arose from his bed, asked all who were present to leave the room, and sent word to the young man to come in.
Upon entering, he at once drew a sword and swore that he would kill the tribune on the spot, if he did not swear an oath to withdraw the suit against his father.
Constrained by the terror of the situation, Pomponius gave his oath.
He reported the matter to the people, explaining why he was obliged to drop the prosecution, and withdrew his suit against Manlius.
Such was the regard for the sanctity of an oath in those days.
And that lad was the Titus Manlius who in the battle on the Anio killed the Gaul by whom he had been challenged to single combat, pulled off his torque and thus won his surname.
And in his third consulship he routed the Latins and put them to flight in the battle on the Veseris.
He was one of the greatest of the great, and one who, while more than generous toward his father, could yet be bitterly severe toward his son.
Now, as Regulus deserves praise for being true to his oath, so those ten whom Hannibal sent to the senate on parole after the battle of Cannae deserve censure, if it is true that they did not return; for they were sworn to return to the camp which had fallen into the hands of the Carthaginians, if they did not succeed in negotiating an exchange of prisoners.
Historians are not in agreement in regard to the facts.
Polybius, one of the very best authorities, states that of the ten eminent nobles who were sent at that time, nine returned when their mission failed at the hands of the senate.
But one of the ten, who, a little while after leaving the camp, had gone back on the pretext that he had forgotten something or other, remained behind at Rome; he explained that by his return to the camp he was released from the obligation of his oath.
He was wrong; for deceit does not remove the guilt of perjury it merely aggravates it.
His cunning that impudently tried to masquerade as prudence was, therefore, only folly.
And so the senate ordered that the cunning scoundrel should be taken back to Hannibal in chains.
But the most significant part of the story is this: the eight thousand prisoners in Hannibal's hands were not men that he had taken in the battle or that had escaped in the peril of their lives, but men that the consuls Paulus and Varro had left behind in camp.
Though these might have been ransomed by a small sum of money, the senate voted not to redeem them, in order that our soldiers might have the lesson planted in their hearts that they must either conquer or die.
When Hannibal heard this news, according to that same writer, he lost heart completely, because the senate and the people of Rome displayed courage so lofty in a time of disaster.
Thus apparent expediency is outweighed when placed in the balance against moral rectitude.
Gaius Acilius, on the other hand, the author of a history of Rome in Greek, says that there were several who played the same trick of returning to the camp to release themselves thus from the obligation of their oath, and that they were branded by the censors with every mark of disgrace.
Let this be the conclusion of this topic.
For it must be perfectly apparent that acts that are done with a cowardly, craven, abject, broken spirit, as the act of Regulus would have been if he had supported in regard to the prisoners a measure that seemed to be advantageous for him personally, but disadvantageous for the state, or if he had consented to remain at home that such acts are not expedient, because they are shameful, dishonourable, and immoral.
We have still left our fourth division, comprising propriety, moderation, temperance, selfrestraint, self-control.
Can anything be expedient, then, which is contrary to such a chorus of virtues?
And yet the Cyrenaics, adherents of the school of Aristippus, and the philosophers who bear the name of Anniceris find all good to consist in pleasure and consider virtue praiseworthy only because it is productive of pleasure.
Now that these schools are out of date, Epicurus has come into vogue an advocate and supporter of practically the same doctrine.
Against such a philosophy we must fight it out "with horse and foot," as the saying is, if our purpose is to defend and maintain our standard of moral rectitude.
For if, as we find it in the writings of Metrodorus, not only expediency but happiness in life depends wholly upon a sound physical constitution and the reasonable expectation that it will always remain sound, then that expediency and, what is more, the highest expediency, as they estimate it will assuredly clash with moral rectitude.
For, first of all, what position will wisdom occupy in that system?
The position of collector of pleasures from every possible source?
What a sorry state of servitude for a virtue to be pandering to sensual pleasure!
And what will be the function of wisdom?
To make skilful choice between sensual pleasures?
Granted that there may be nothing more pleasant, what can be conceived more degrading for wisdom than such a role?
Then again, if anyone hold that pain is the supreme evil, what place in his philosophy has fortitude, which is but indifference to toil and pain?
For, however many passages there are in which Epicurus speaks right manfully of pain, we must nevertheless consider not what he says, but what it is consistent for a man to say who has defined the good in terms of pleasure and evil in terms of pain.
And further, if I should listen to him, I should find that in many passages he has a great deal to say about temperance and self-control; but "the water will not run," as they say.
For how can he commend self-control and yet posit pleasure as the supreme good?
For self-control is the foe of the passions, and the passions are the handmaids of pleasure.
And yet when it comes to these three cardinal virtues, those philosophers shift and turn as best they can, and not without cleverness.
They admit wisdom into their system as the knowledge that provides pleasures and banishes pain; they clear the way for fortitude also in some way to fit in with their doctrines, when they teach that it is a rational means for looking with indifference upon death and for enduring pain.
They bring even temperance in not very easily, to be sure, but still as best they can; for they hold that the height of pleasure is found in the absence of pain.
Justice totters or rather, I should say, lies already prostrate; so also with all those virtues which are discernible in social life and the fellowship of human society.
For neither goodness nor generosity nor courtesy can exist, any more than friendship can, if they are not sought of and for themselves, but are cultivated only for the sake of sensual pleasure or personal advantage.
Let us now recapitulate briefly.
As I have shown that such expediency as is opposed to moral rectitude is no expediency, so I maintain that any and all sensual pleasure is opposed to moral rectitude.
And therefore Calliphon and Dinomachus, in my judgment, deserve the greater condemnation; they imagined that they should settle the controversy by coupling pleasure with moral rectitude; as well yoke a man with a beast!
But moral rectitude does not accept such a union; she abhors it, spurns it.
Why, the supreme good, which ought to be simple, cannot be a compound and mixture of absolutely contradictory qualities.
But this theory I have discussed more fully in another connection; for the subject is a large one. Now for the matter before us.
We have, then, fully discussed the problem how a question is to be decided, if ever that which seems to be expediency clashes with moral rectitude.
But if, on the other hand, the assertion is made that pleasure admits of a show of expediency also, there can still be no possible union between it and moral rectitude.
For, to make the most generous admission we can in favour of pleasure, we will grant that it may contribute something that possibly gives some spice to life, but certainly nothing that is really expedient.
Herewith, my son Marcus, you have a present from your father a generous one, in my humble opinion; but its value will depend upon the spirit in which you receive it.
And yet you must welcome these three books as fellow-guests, so to speak, along with your notes on Cratippus's lectures.
But as you would sometimes give ear to me also, if I had come to Athens (and I should be there now, if my country had not called me back with accents unmistakable, when I was half-way there), so you will please devote as much time as you can to these volumes, for in them my voice will travel to you; and you can devote to them as much time as you will.
And when I see that you take delight in this branch of philosophy, I shall then talk further with you at an early date, I hope, face to face-but as long as you are abroad, I shall converse with you thus at a distance.
Farewell, my dear Cicero, and be assured that, while you are the object of my deepest affection, you will be dearer to me still, if you find pleasure in such counsel and instruction.
If, O conscript fathers, I return you thanks in a very inadequate manner for your kindness to me, and to my brother, and to my children, (which shall never be forgotten by us,) I beg and entreat you not to attribute it so much to any coldness of my disposition, as to the magnitude of the service which you have done me.
For what fertility of genius, what copiousness of eloquence can be so great, what language can be found of such divine and extraordinary power, as to enable any one, I will not say to do due honour to the universal kindness of you all towards us, but even to count up and enumerate all the separate acts of kindness which we have received from you?
You have restored to me my brother; whom I have wished for above all things; you have restored me to my most affectionate brother; you have restored us parents to our children, and our children to us; you have restored to us our dignity, our rank, our fortunes, the republic, which we reverence above all things, and our country, than which nothing can be dearer to us; you have restored us, in short, to ourselves.
And if we ought to consider our parents most dear to us, because by them our life, our property, our freedom, and our rights as citizens have been given to us;
if we love the immortal gods, by whose kindness we have preserved all those things, and have also had other benefits added to them;
if we are most deeply attached to the Roman people owing to the honours paid to us by whom we have been placed in this most noble council, and in the very highest rank and dignity and in this citadel of the whole earth, if we are devoted to this order of the senate by which we have been frequently distinguished by most honourable decrees in our favour,
surely it is a boundless and infinite obligation which we are under to you, who, by your singular zeal and unanimity an my behalf, have combined at one time the benefits done us by our parents, the bounty of the immortal gods, the honours conferred on us by the Roman people, and your own frequent decisions in my case;
in such a manner that, owing, as we do, much to you, and great gratitude to the Roman people, and innumerable thanks to our parents, and everything to the immortal gods, the honours and enjoyments which we had separately before by their instrumentality, we have now recovered all together by your kindness.
Therefore, O conscript fathers, we seem by your agency to have obtained a species of immortality, a thing too great to be even wished for by men.
For what time will there ever be in which the memory and fame of your kindnesses to me will perish?
The memory of your kindness, who, at the very time that you were besieged by violence and arms and terror and threats, not long after my departure all agreed in recalling me, at the motion of Lucius Ninnius, a most fearless and virtuous man, the most faithful and (if it had come to a battle) the least timid defender of my safety that that fatal year could produce.
After the honour of making a formal decree to that effect was refused to you by the means of that tribune of the people, who as he was unable of himself to injure the republic, destroyed it as far as he could by the wickedness of another, you never kept silence concerning me, you never ceased to demand my safety from those consuls who had sold it.
Therefore, at last it was owing to your authority and your zeal that that very year which I had preferred to have fatal to myself rather than to my country, elected these men as tribunes, who proposed a law concerning my safety, and constantly brought it under your notice.
For the consuls being modest men, and having a regard for the laws, were hindered by a law, not by the one which had been passed concerning me, but by one respecting themselves, when my enemy had carried a clause, that when those men had come to life again who nearly destroyed the state, then I might return to the city.
By which action he confessed two things both that he longed for them to be living, and also that the republic would be in great peril, if either the enemies and murderers of the republic came to life again, or if I did not return.
Therefore, in that very year when I had departed, and when the chief man of the state was forced to defend his own life, not by the protection of the laws, but by that of his own walls, when the republic was without consuls, and bereft, like an orphan, not only of its regular parents, but even of its annual guardians, when you were forbidden to deliver your opinions, when the chief clause of my proscription was repeatedly read, still you never hesitated to consider my safety as united with the general welfare.
But when, by the singular and admirable virtue of Publius Lentulus the consul, you began on the first of January to see light arising in the republic out of the clouds and darkness of the preceding year, when the great reputation of Quintus Metellus, that most noble and excellent man, and the virtue and loyalty of the praetors, and of nearly all the tribunes of the people, had likewise come to the aid of the republic, when Cnaeus Pompeius, the greatest man for virtue, and glory, and achievements that any nation or any age has ever produced, the most illustrious man that memory can suggest thought that he could again come with safety into the senate, then your unanimity with respect to my safety was so great that my body only was absent, my dignity had already returned to this country.
And that month you were able to form an opinion as to what was the difference between me and my enemies.
I abandoned my own safety, in order to save the republic from being (for my sake) stained with the blood of the citizens; they thought fit to hinder my return, not by the votes of the Roman people, but by a river of blood.
Therefore, after those events, you gave no answers to the citizens, or the allies, or to kings; the judges gave no decisions; the people came to no vote on any matter; this body issued no declarations by its authority; you saw the forum silent the senate-house mute, the city dumb and dispirited.
And then, too, when he had gone away, who, being authorized by you, had resisted murder and conflagration, you saw men rushing all over the city with sword and firebrand; you saw the houses of the magistrates attacked, the temples of the gods burnt, the faces of a most admirable man and illustrious consul burnt, the holy person of a most fearless and virtuous officer, a tribune of the people, not only laid hands on and insulted, but wounded with the sword and killed.
And by that murder some magistrates were so alarmed, that partly out of fear of death, partly out of despair for the republic, they in some degree forsook my cause;
but others remained behind, whom neither terror, nor violence, nor hope, nor fear, nor promises, nor threats, nor arms, nor firebrands, could influence so as to make them cease to stand by your authority, and the dignity of the Roman people, and my safety.
The chief of those men was Publius Lentulus, the parent and god of my life, and fortune, and memory, and name.
He thought that the best proof that he could give of his virtue, the best indication that he could afford of his disposition, the greatest ornament with which he could embellish his consulship would be the restoration of me to myself, to my friends, to you, and to the republic.
And as soon as ever he was appointed consul elect he never hesitated to express an opinion concerning my safety worthy both of himself and of the republic.
When the veto was interposed by the tribune of the people, when that admirable clause was read: "That no one should make any motion before you that no one should propose any decree to you that no one should raise any discussion, or make any speech or take any vote or frame any law;" he thought all that as I have said before, a proscription and not a law, by which a citizen who had deserved well of the republic was by name and without any trial, taken from the senate and the republic at the same time.
But as soon as he entered on his office, I will not say what did he do before, but what else did he do at all, except labour by my preservation to establish your authority and dignity on a firm basis for the future?
O ye immortal gods!
what great kindness do you appear to have shown me, in making Publius Lentulus consul this year.
How much greater still would your bounty bare been, had he been so the preceding year;
for I should not have been in want of such medicine as a consul could give, unless I had fallen by a wound inflicted by a consul.
I had been often told by one of the wisest of men and one of the most virtuous of citizens, Quintus Catulus, that it was not often that there was one wicked consul, but that there had never been two at the same time since the foundation of Rome, except in that terrible time of Cinna.
Wherefore, he used to say that my interest would always be firmly secured, as long as there was even one virtuous consul in the republic.
And he would have spoken the truth, if that state of things with respect to consuls could have remained lasting and perpetual, that, as there never had been two bad ones in the republic, so there never should be.
But if Quintus Metellus had been at that time consul, who was then my enemy, do you doubt what would have been his feelings with regard to my preservation, when you see that he was a mover and seconder of the measure proposed for my restoration?
But at that time there were two consuls, whose minds, narrow, contemptible, mean, groveling, dark, and dirty, were unable to look properly at, or to uphold, or to support the mere name of the consulship, much less the splendour of that honour, and the importance of that authority.
They were not consuls, but dealers in provinces, and sellers of your dignity.
One of whom demanded back from me, in the hearing of many, Catiline, his lover; the other reclaimed Cethegus, his cousin; the two most wicked men in the memory of man, who (I will not call them consuls, but robbers) not only deserted, in a cause in which, above all others, the welfare of the republic and the dignity of the consulship was concerned, but betrayed me, and opposed me, and wished to see me stripped of all aid, not only from themselves, but also from you and from the other orders of the state.
One of them, however, deceived neither me nor any one else.
For who ever could have any hope of any good existing in that man, the earliest period of whose life was made openly subservient to everyone's lusts;
who had not the heart to repel the obscene impurity of men from the holiest portion of his person?
who, after he had ruined his own estate with no less activity than he afterwards displayed in his endeavours to ruin the republic, supported his indigence and his luxury by every sort of pandering and infamy;
who, if he had not taken refuge at the altar of the tribuneship, would not have been able to escape from the authority of the praetor, nor the multitude of his creditors, nor the seizure of his goods.
And if he had not while in discharge of that office, passed that law about the piratical war, he, in truth, would have yielded to his own poverty and wickedness, and had recourse to piracy himself; and who would have done so with less injury to the republic than he did by remaining within our walls as an impious enemy and robber.
It was he who was inspecting victims, and sitting in the discharge of that duty, when a tribune of the people procured a law to be passed that no regard should be had to the auspices, that no one should on that account be allowed to interrupt the assembly or the comitia, or to put his veto on the passing of a law; and that the Aelian and Fufian laws should have no validity, which our ancestors had enacted, intending them to be the firmest protection of the republic against the insanity of the tribunes.
And he also afterwards, when a countless multitude of virtuous men had come to him from the Capitol as suppliants, and in morning garments, and when all the most noble young men of Rome, and all the Roman knights, had thrown themselves at the feet of that most profligate pander, with what an expression of countenance did that curled and perfumed debauchee reject, not only the tears of the citizens, but even the prayers of his country!
Nor was he content with that but he even went up to the assembly, and there said what even if his man Catiline had come to life again he would not have dared to say, that he would make the Roman knights pay for the nones of December of my consulship, and for the Capitoline Hill; and he not only said this, but he even summoned those before him that suited him.
And this imperious consul actually banished from the city Lucius Lamia, a Roman knight, a man of the highest character, and a very eager advocate of my safety, because of his intimacy with me, and very much attached to the state, as it was likely that a man of his fortune would be.
And when you had passed a resolution to change your garments, and had changed them, and though, indeed, all virtuous men had already done the same thing, he, reeking with perfumes, clad in his toga praetexta, which all the praetors and aediles had at that time laid aside, derided your mourning garb, and the grief of a most grateful city, and did what no tyrant ever did, he issued an edict that you should lament your disasters in secret and not presume openly to bewail the miseries of your country.
And when in the Circus Flaminius (I will not say the consul had been conducted into the assembly by a tribune of the people, but) the archpirate had been brought in by another robber, he came first a man of what exceeding dignity, full of wine, sleep, and debauchery!
with hair dripping with ointments, with carefully arranged locks, with heavy eyes, moist cheeks, a husky and drunken voice; and he, a grave authority, said that he was greatly displeased at citizens having been executed without having been formally condemned.
Where is it that this great authority has lain hid so long out of our sight?
Why has the extraordinary virtue of this ringletted dunce been wasted so long in scenes of debauchery and gluttony?
For that other man, Caesoninus Calventius, from his youth up has been habituated to the forum, though, except his assumed and crafty melancholy, there was no single thing to recommend him, no knowledge of the law, no skill in speaking, no knowledge of military affairs or of men, no liberality.
And if, while passing him, you noticed how ungentlemanlike, and rough, and sulky he looked, though you might think him a barbarian and a boor, still you would not suppose him to be lascivious and profligate.
You would think it made no difference whether you were standing in the forum with this man, or with a barbarian from Aethiopia; there he was, in that sense, without flavour, a mute, slow, uncivilized piece of goods.
You would be apt to suppose him a Cappadocian just escaped out of a lot of slaves for sale.
Then, again, how lustful was he at home, how impure, how intemperate.
He was not like a front-door, open for the reception of legitimate pleasures, but when he began to devote himself to literature, and, beastly rather a postern for all sorts of secret gratification.
And glutton that he was, to learn philosophy with the Greeks, then he became an Epicurean, not because he was really much devoted to that sect such as it is, but because he was caught by that one expression about pleasure.
And he has masters, none of those foolish fellows who go on for whole days discussing duty and virtue, who exhort men to labour, to industry, to encounter dangers for the sake of their country, but men who argue that no hour ought to be unoccupied by pleasure; that in every part of the body there ought always to be some joy and delight to be perceived.
He uses his masters as a sort of superintendents of his lusts; they seek out and scent out all sorts of pleasures; they are the seasoners and furnishers of his banquets they appraise and value the different pleasures, they give a formal decision and judgment as to how much indulgence ought to be allowed to each separate pleasure.
He, becoming accomplished in all these arts, despised this most prudent city to such a degree that he thought that all his lusts and all his atrocities could be concealed, if he only thrust his ill-omened face into the forum.
He deceived me, though I will not so much say me (for I know, from my connection with the Pisos how much the Transalpine blood on his mother's side had removed him from the qualities of that family) but he deceived you and the Roman people, not by his wisdom or his eloquence, as is often the case with many men, but by his wrinkled brow and solemn look.
Lucius Piso, did you dare at that time with that eye (I will not say with that mind ) with that forehead (I will not say with what character,) and with that arrogance (for I cannot say, after such achievements,) to unite with Aulus Gabinius in forming plans for my ruin?
Did not the odour of that man's perfumes, or his breath reeking with wine, or his forehead marked with the traces of the curling-iron, lead you to think that as you were like him in reality, you were no longer able to use the impenetrability of your countenance to conceal such enormous atrocities?
Did you dare to continue with that man to abandon the consular dignity, the existing condition of the republic, the authority of the senate, the fortunes of a citizen who had above all others deserved well of the republic, to the provinces?
While you were consul, according to your edicts and commands, it was not allowed to the Roman senate or people to come to the assistance of the republic, I will not say by their votes and their authority, but even by their grief and their mourning garb.
Did you think that you were consul at Capua, a city where there was once the abode of arrogance, or at Rome, where all the consuls that ever existed before you were obedient to the senate?
Did you dare, when you were brought forward in the Flaminian Circus, with your colleague, to say that you had always been merciful?
by which expression you declared that the senate and all virtuous men were cruel at the time that I warded off ruin from the republic.
You were a merciful man when you handed me over, me, your own relation, me, whom at your comitia you had appointed as chief guardian of the prerogative tribe, whose opinions on the calends of January you had asked then, bound and helpless to the enemies of the republic!
You repelled my son-in-law, your own kinsman; you repelled your own near relation, my daughter, with most haughty and inhuman language, from your knees; and you, also, O man of singular mercy and clemency, when I, together with the republic, had fallen, not by a blow aimed by a tribune, but by a wound inflicted by a consul, behaved with such wickedness and such intemperance, that you did not allow one single hour to elapse between the time of my disaster and your plunder; you did not allow even time for the lamentations and groans of the city to die away.
It was not yet openly known that the republic had fallen, when you thought fit to arrange its interment.
At one and the same moment my house was plundered and set on fire, my property from my house on the Palatine Hill was taken to the house of the consul who was my neighbour, the goods from my Tusculan villa were also taken to the house of my neighbour there, the other consul; when, while the same mob of artisans were giving their votes, the same gladiator proposing and passing laws, the forum being unoccupied, not only by virtuous men, but even by free citizens, and being entirely empty, the Roman people being utterly ignorant what was going on, the senate being beaten down and crushed, there being two wicked and impious consuls, the treasury, the prisoners, the legions, allies and military commands, were given away as they pleased.
But the ruin wrought by these consuls you, O consuls, have prevented from spreading further by your virtue, being assisted as you have been by the admirable loyalty and diligence of the tribunes of the people and the praetors.
What shall I say of that most illustrious man, Titus Annius?
or, who can ever speak of such a citizen in an adequate or worthy manner?
For when he saw that a wicked citizen, or, it would be more correct to say, a domestic enemy, required (if it were only possible to employ the laws) to be crushed by judicial proceedings, or that if violence hindered and put an end to the courts of justice, in that case audacity must be put down by virtue, madness by courage, rashness by wisdom, hand by hand, violence by violence, he first of all prosecuted him for violence;
when he saw that the very man whom he was prosecuting had destroyed the courts of justice, he took care that he should not be able to carry everything by violence.
He taught us that neither private houses, nor temples, nor the forum, nor the senate-house could be defended from the bands of domestic robbers without the greatest gallantry, and large resources and numerous forces.
He was the first man after my departure who relieved the virtuous from fear, and deprived the audacious of hope; who delivered this august body from alarm, and the city from slavery.
And Publius Sextius following the same line of conduct with equal virtue, courage, and loyalty, thought that there were no enmities, no efforts of violence, no attacks, no dangers even to his life, which it became him to shun, in defence of my safety, of your authority, and of the constitution of the state.
He, by his diligence, so recommended the cause of the senate, thrown into disorder as it was by the harangues of wicked men, to the multitude, that your name soon became the most popular of all names, your authority the object of the greatest affection to all men.
He defended me by every means that a tribune of the people could employ; and supported me by every sort of kind attention, just as if he had been my own brother; by his clients, and freedmen, and household, and resources, and letters, I was so much supported, that he seemed to be not only my assistant under, but my partner in calamity.
Now you have seen the kindness and zeal of the others; how devoted to me was Caius Cestilius, how attached to you, how uniformly faithful to our cause.
What did Marcus Cispius do?
I know how much I owe to him and to his father and brother; and they, though they had some personal grudge against me on their own private account, still disregarded their private dislike out of recollection of my services to the state.
Also, Titus Fadius, who was my quaestor, and Marcus Curtius, to whose father I was quaestor, cherished the memory of our connection with all zeal, and affection, and courage.
Caius Messius made many speeches in my behalf, for the sake both of our friendship and of the republic.
And he at the beginning proposed a special law respecting my safety.
If Quintus Fabricius could only have effected, in spite of violence and arms, what he endeavoured to do in my behalf, we should have recovered our position in the month of January.
His own inclination prompted him to labour for my safety, violence checked him, your authority recalled him.
Of what disposition towards me the praetors were, you were able to form an opinion when Lucius Caecilius, in his private character, laboured to support me from his own resources, and in his public capacity proposed a law respecting my safety, in concert with all his colleagues, and refused the plunderers of my property permission to support their actions by legal proceedings.
But Marcus Calidius, the moment he was elected, showed by his vote how dear my safety was to him.
Caius Septimius, Quintus Valerius, Publius Crassus, Sextus Quintilius, and Caius Cornutus, all devoted all their energies to the promotion of my interests and those of the republic.
And while I gladly make mention of these things, I am not unwilling to pass over the wicked actions done by some people with a view to injure me.
It is not suited to my fortunes at present to remember injuries, which, even if I were able to revenge them, I still would rather forget.
All my life is to be devoted to a different object: to that of showing my gratitude to those who have deserved well of me; to preserving those friendships which have been tried in the fire; to waging war against my open enemies; to pardoning my timid friends; to avoiding the showing those who deserted me any indignation at having been forced to leave the city; to console those who promoted my return by a proper display of my dignity.
And if I had no other duty before me for all the rest of my life, except to appear sufficiently grateful to the very originators and prime movers and authors of my safety, still I should think the period that remains to me of life too brief; I will not say for requiting, but even for enumerating the kindnesses which have been shown to me.
For, when shall I, or when will all my relations, be able to show proper gratitude to this man and to his children?
What memory, what force of genius, what amount of deference and respect will be a fit return for such numerous and immense services?
He was the first man who held out to me the promise and faith of a consul when I was overwhelmed and miserable; he it was who recalled me from death to life, from despair to hope, from destruction to safety.
His affection for me, his zeal for the republic, was so great, that he kept thinking how he might not only relieve my calamity, but how he might even make it honourable.
For what could be more honourable, what could happen to me more creditable, than that which you decreed on his motion, that all people from all Italy, who desired the safety of the republic, should come forward for the sole purpose of supporting and defending me, a ruined and almost broken-hearted man?
So that the senate summoned the citizens and the whole of Italy to come from all their lands and from every town to the defence of one man, with the very same force of expression which had never been used but three times before since the foundation of Rome, and at those times it was the consul who used it in behalf of the entire republic, addressing himself to those only who could hear his voice.
What could I leave to my posterity more glorious than the fact, that the senate had declared its judgment that any citizen who did not defend me, did not desire the safety of the republic?
Therefore your authority, and the preeminent dignity of the consul, had this great effect, that every one thought that he was committing a shameful crime if he did not come to that summons.
And this same consul, when that incredible multitude, when Italy itself I might almost say, had come to Rome, summoned you repeatedly to the Capitol;
and at that time you had an opportunity of seeing what great power excellence of natural disposition and true nobleness have.
For Quintus Metellus, himself an enemy of mine, and a brother of an enemy of mine, as soon as he was assured of your inclinations, laid aside his own private dislike to me and allowed Publius Servilius, a most illustrious man, and also a most virtuous one, and a most intimate friend of my own, to recall him, by what I may call the divine influence of his authority and eloquence, to the exploits and virtues of his race and of their common family, so as to take to his counsels his brother, in the shades below, the companion of my fortunes, and all the Metelli, those most admirable citizens, summoning them as it were from Acheron; and among them the great conqueror of Numidia, whose departure from his country formerly seemed grievous to all the citizens, but scarcely even vexatious to himself.
He, therefore, turns out now, not only a defender of my safety, having been previously to this one kindness of his always my enemy, but even the seconder of my restoration to my dignity.
And on that day when you met in the senate to the number of four hundred and seventeen, and when all these magistrates were present one alone dissented; he who thought that the conspirators could by his law be awakened from the shades below.
And on that day when in most weighty and copious language you delivered your decision, that the republic had been preserved by my counsels, he as consul again took care that the same things should be said by the chief men of the state in the assembly the next day; and he then spoke on my behalf with the greatest eloquence, and brought the assembly into such a state, all Italy standing by and listening, that no one would listen to the hateful and detested voice of any of my hired or profligate enemies.
To these acts of his, being not only aids to my safety, but even ornaments of my dignity, you yourselves added the rest that was wanting.
You decreed that no one should by any means whatever hinder that matter from proceeding; that if any one did try to interpose any obstacle, you would be very angry and indignant; that he would be acting in a manner contrary to the interests of the republic, and the safety of good men, and the unanimous wish of the citizens; and that such a man was instantly to be reported to you.
And you passed a vote that if they persisted in interposing obstacles, I was to return in spite of them.
Why need I tell how thanks were given to all those who had come up from the municipal towns;
or that they were entreated to be present with equal eagerness on that day when the whole affair was consummated?
Lastly, why need I tell what you did on that day which Publius Lentulus has made as a birthday to me, and to my brother, and to our children, to be recollected not only by us, who are now alive, but by all our race for ever?
On which day, in the comitia centuriata, which our ancestors rightly called and considered the real comitia, he summoned us back to our country, so that the same centuries which had made me consul should declare their approval of my consulship.
On that day what citizen was there who thought it right, whatever his age or state of health might be, to deny himself the opportunity of giving his vote for my safety?
When did you ever see such a multitude assembled in the Campus, such a splendid show of all Italy and of all orders of men?
when did you ever see movers, and tellers, and keepers of the votes all of such high rank?
Therefore, through the active, and admirable, and godlike kindness of Publius Lentulus, we were not allowed to return to our country, as some most eminent citizens have been, but we were brought back in triumph, borne by white horses in a gilded car.
Can I ever appear grateful enough to Cnaeus Pompeius, who said, not only among you who all were of the same opinion, but also before the whole Roman people, that the safety of the republic had been preserved by me, and was inseparably connected with mine?
who recommended my cause to the wise, and taught the ignorant, and at the same time checked the wicked by his authority, and encouraged the good; who not only exhorted the Roman people to espouse my cause, but even entreated them to do so, as if he were speaking for a brother or a parent; who, at a time when he was forced to keep within his house from fear of contests and bloodshed, begged even of the preceding tribunes to propose and carry a law respecting my safety; who in a colony lately erected, where he himself was discharging the duties of a magistrate in it, where there was no bribed interrupter, declared that the privilegium passed against me was violent and cruel, confirming that declaration by the authority of most honourable men, and by public letters, and, being the chief man there, gave his opinion that it was becoming to implore the protection of all Italy for my safety; who, when he himself had always been a most firm friend to me, laboured also to make all his own friends also to me.
And by what services can I requite the kindness of Titus Annius to me?
all whose actions, the whole of whose conduct and thoughts, the whole of whose tribuneship, in short, was nothing else except a consistent, continual, gallant, unwearied advocacy of my safety.
Why need I speak of Publius Sextius?
who showed his good-will and faithful attachment to me, not only by his grief of mind, but even by the wounds which he received on his person.
But to you, O conscript fathers, and to each individual of you, I have both declared, and I will continue to declare my gratitude.
I declared it at the beginning to your whole body, as well as I could; to declare it with sufficient eloquence is what I am totally unable to do.
And although I have received special favours from many persons, about which it is impossible for me to keep silence, still it is impossible at the present time, and with the apprehensions which I feel, to endeavour to enumerate the kindnesses which I have received from individuals.
For it is difficult to avoid passing over some, and yet it would be impious to forget any one.
I, O conscript fathers, ought to reverence every one of you as I do the immortal gods.
But as, even in the case of the immortal gods themselves, we are wont not always to pay worship and to offer prayers to the same deities, but sometimes we pray to one and sometimes to another; so in the case of the men who have behaved to me with such godlike service, my whole life shall be devoted to celebrating their kindness towards me, and showing my reverent sense of it.
But on this day I have thought that it became me to return thanks especially to the different magistrates by name, and also to one private individual, who for the sake of my safety, had visited all the municipal towns and colonies, had as a suppliant addressed his entreaties to the Roman people, and had declared that opinion which you followed when you restored me to my dignities.
You always distinguished me when I was prosperous; when I was in distress you defended me to the extent of your power, by the change of your garments, and your general mourning,
There have been times within our own recollection when senators did not dare to change their robes even in their own personal dangers; but in my danger the whole senate changed its garments as far as it was allowed to do without interruption from the edicts of those men who wished to deprive me in my peril not only of all protection from them, but of even the benefit of your prayers in my behalf.
And when I was in such circumstances as these, when I saw that I as a private individual had to contend with the same array which as consul I had defeated, using not arms but your authority, I deliberated much with myself.
The consul had said that he would make the Roman knights pay for the scenes on the Capitoline Hill.
Some were summoned by name, others were prosecuted, some were banished.
All access to the temples was prevented, not merely by their being garrisoned or occupied with a strong force, but by their being demolished.
The other consul, not content with only abandoning me and the republic, unless he could also betray us to the enemies of the republic, had bound those enemies to him by promising them the rewards which they coveted.
There was another man at the gates with a command given to him for many years, and with a large army.
I do not say that he was an enemy of mine, but I do know that he did nothing when he was stated to be my enemy.
As there were thought to be two parties in the republic, the one was supposed, out of its enmity to me, to demand that I should be given up to it; the other, to defend me, but timidly out of fear of bloodshed.
But those who seemed to require me to be given up to them increased the fear of a contest by their conduct as they never diminished the suspicions and anxieties of men by denying what they were suspected of.
Wherefore, when I saw the senate deprived of leaders, and myself attacked by some of the magistrates, betrayed by some, and abandoned by others; when I saw that slaves were being enlisted by name under some pretence of forming guilds; that all the troops of Catiline were recalled to their original hopes of massacre and conflagration under almost the same leaders as before; that the Roman knights were under the same fear of proscription as before; that the municipal towns were in dread of being pillaged, and every one in fear of his life; I might I might, I say, O conscript fathers, still have been able to defend myself by force of arms, and many wise and brave men advised me to do so; nor was I wanting in the same courage which I had shown before, and which was not unknown to you.
But I saw that if I defeated my present enemy, I had still too many others behind who must also be defeated; that if I were beaten myself; many virtuous men would fall for my sake, and with me, and even after me; and that the avengers of the blood of the tribunes were present, but that all satisfaction for my death must he exacted by the slow progress of the law, and reserved for posterity.
I did not choose, after I had as consul maintained the general safety of the state without having recourse to arms, to take arms as a private individual in my own cause; I preferred that virtuous men should grieve for my fortune rather than despair of their own; and if I were slain by myself; that I thought would be a shameful end for me; but if I were slain with many others, that I thought would be fatal to the republic.
If I had supposed that eternal misery was before me, I would rather have endured death than everlasting agony.
But I felt sure that I should not be absent from this city any longer than the constitution itself was, and, while that was banished, I thought it no longer desirable for myself that I should remain in it; and in accordance with my expectation, as soon as ever the constitution was restored, it brought me back in triumph as its companion.
The laws were all banished as well as I, the courts of justice were banished as well as I; the prerogatives of the magistrates, the authority of the senate, the liberty of the citizens, even the fruitfulness of the land, all piety and all religion, whether it was with respect to men or gods, were all banished from the state when I was banished.
And if they had been lost to you for ever, I should mourn over your fortunes rather than regret the loss of my home amongst you; but if they were ever restored, I was quite sure that I should be enabled to return with them.
And of these feelings of mine, he who was the protector of my life is also my most indisputable witness, namely Cnaeus Plancius, who, disregarding all the distinctions and emoluments which might have been derived from a province, devoted his whole quaestorship to supporting and preserving me.
If he had been my quaestor when I was commander-in-chief; he would have stood in the relation of a son to me; now he surely shall be looked upon by me as a parent, since he has been my quaestor, not while in authority, but in grief.
Wherefore, O conscript fathers, since I have been restored to the republic at the same time with the constitution of the republic, in whatever I do for the defence of it, I will not only not in the slightest degree abridge my former liberty, but I will even increase it.
In truth, if I defended the republic at a time when it was under some obligations to me, what ought I to do now when I owe everything to it?
For what is there that can crush or even weaken my spirit, when you see that calamity itself is in my case not a witness of any error; but of most extraordinary services rendered to the republic?
For these disasters were brought on me by my defence of the state; they were undergone by me of my own free will, in order that the republic which had been defended by me should not be brought into the very extremity of peril.
It was not in my case, as in that of Publius Popillius, a most noble man, my young sons, or a multitude of my relations that entreated the Roman people in my behalf;
it was not in my case, as in the case of Quintus Metellus, a most admirable and most illustrious man, a youthful son of proved virtue who strove for me;
it was not Lucius and Caius Metellus, men of consular rank, nor their sons; nor Quintus Metellus Nepos, who was at that very moment a candidate for the consulship, nor the Luculli or Servilii, or Scipios, sons of the Metelli, who with tears and in mourning garments addressed their supplications to the Roman people;
but one single brother, who behaved to me with the dutiful affection of a son, who fortified me like a parent with his counsels, and loved me like a brother (as indeed he was), by his mourning robe and his tears and daily prayers kept alive the regret of me which existed, and the recollection of my name and services;
and while he had made up his mind, that unless by your votes he could recover me here, he would encounter the same fortune himself, and choose the same abode both in life and death, still he never was alarmed either at the greatness of the business, or at his own solitary and unassisted condition, nor at the violence and warlike measures of my adversaries.
There was another upholder and assiduous defender of my fortunes, Caius Piso, my son-in-law, a man of the greatest virtue and piety, who disregarded the threats of my enemies, the hostility of my connection, and his own near relation, the consul; who, as quaestor, passed over Pontus and Bithynia for the sake of ensuring my safety.
The senate never decreed anything respecting Publius Popillius; no mention was ever made in this assembly of Quintus Metellus.
They were restored by motions made by the tribunes, after their enemies had been slain, and, above all, they were not restored by the interposition of any authority on the part of the senate, though one of them had done what he did in obedience to the senate, the other had fled from violence and bloodshed.
For Caius Marius, the only man of consular dignity in the memory of man who was ever driven from the city in times of civil discord before me, was not only not restored by the senate, but by his return almost destroyed the senate.
There was no unanimity of magistrates in their cases, no summoning of the Roman people to come to the defence of the republic, no commotion throughout Italy, no decrees of municipalities and colonies in their favour.
Wherefore, since your authority has summoned me, since the Roman people his recalled me, since the republic has begged me to return, since almost all Italy has brought me back in triumph on its shoulders, I will take care, O conscript fathers, now that those things have been restored to me, the restoration of which did not depend on myself, not to appear wanting in those qualities with which I can provide myself; I will take care, now that I have recovered those things which I had lost, never to lose my virtue and loyal attachment to you.
That which I requested in my prayers of the all-good and all-powerful Jupiter, and the rest of the immortal gods, O Romans, at the time when I devoted myself and my fortunes in defence of your safety, and tranquillity, and concord, namely, that if I had at any time preferred my own interests to your safety, I might find that punishment, which I was then encountering of my own accord, everlasting; but that if I had done those things which I had done out of an honest desire to preserve the state, and if I had undertaken that miserable journey on which I was then setting out for the sake of ensuring your safety, in order that the hatred which wicked and audacious men had long since conceived and entertained against the republic and against all good men, might break upon me alone, rather than on every virtuous man, and on the entire republic if I say these were my feelings towards you and towards your children, that in that case, a recollection of me, a pity and regret for me should, at some time or other come upon you and the conscript fathers, and all Italy, I now rejoice above all things that that request is heard that I am bound to perform all that I then vowed, by the judgment of the immortal gods, by the testimony of the senate by the unanimous consent of all Italy, by the confession of my enemies, by your godlike and never-to-be-forgotten kindness, O citizens of Rome.
For although there is nothing more to be wished for by man than prosperous, equal, continual good-fortune in life, flowing on in a prosperous course, without any misadventure; still, if all my life had been tranquil and peaceful, I should have been deprived of the incredible and almost heavenly delight and happiness which I now enjoy through your kindness.
What sweeter thing has been given to the race of man, or to each individual, by nature, than his own children?
To me especially, mine, on account of my affectionate nature, and on account of their own excellent qualities, are dearer to me than my life.
And yet I did not feel that pleasure when they were born, that I feel now when they are restored to me.
Nothing was ever more acceptable to any one, than my brother is to me.
I was not so aware of this when I enjoyed his society, as I became when I was deprived of it, and after you again restored me to him and him to me.
His own private estate is a pleasure to every one.
The relics of my fortune, which I have recovered, give me now greater delight than they used to give when they were unimpaired.
Friendship, familiar intercourse, acquaintance with my neighbours, the dependence of one's clients on one, even games and days of festival, are things the delights of which I have learnt to appreciate better by being deprived of them than I did while I was enjoying them.
And honour, dignity, my rank and order, and, above all, your kindness, although they at all times appeared to me most splendid possessions, yet, now that they are recovered, after having been lost, they appear more bright than if they had never been hidden from my sight.
And as for my country, O ye immortal gods, it is scarcely possible to express how dear, how delightful it is to me.
How great is the beauty of Italy! how renowned are its cities! how varied are the enchantments of its scenery! What lands, what crops are here! How noble is the splendour of this city, and the civilization of its citizens, and the dignity of the republic, and your majesty, O people of Rome!
Even of old, no one took greater delight in all those things than I did.
But as good health is more welcome to those who are just recovered from a severe illness than to those who have never been sick, so all those things, now that they have been once missed, delight me more than they did when enjoyed without interruption.
Why, then, am I making all those statements?
To what purpose are they?
I wish to make you understand that no man ever existed of such eloquence, or of such a god-like and incredible genius in oratory, as to be able (I will not say to exaggerate or embellish by his language, but even) to count up and describe the importance and number of the kindnesses which I, and my brother, and my children, have received from you.
I (as was necessarily the case) was born of my parents but a little child; it is of you that I am born a man of consular dignity.
They gave me a brother, without knowing how he would turn out; you have restored him to me after he has been tried and proved to be a man of incredible piety.
I received the republic from them, when it was almost lost; I have recovered it by your means, after every one had acknowledged that it had been saved by the labours of one man.
The immortal gods gave me children; you restored them to me.
Besides these things, I have received many things which I wished for from the immortal gods; but if it had not been for your good-will, I should have lost all those divine gifts.
Last of all, those honours which I obtained separately and step by step, I now receive again from you all together.
So that all that we owed of old to our parents, all that we owed to the immortal gods, and all that we owed to you, all that put together we now owe at this time to the entire Roman people.
For as, in the case of your very kindness itself, its magnitude is so great that I cannot do adequate justice to it in my speech; so also in your zeal such great good-will and inclination towards me was displayed, that you seem not only to have taken my misfortune off from me, but even to have increased my dignity.
For it was not my youthful sons and many other relations and kinsmen who offered up their prayers for my return, as they did for that of Publius Popillius, a most noble man.
It was not, as it was in the case of Quintus Metellus, that most illustrious man, a son of an age fully proved by this time; or Lucius Diadematus, a man of consular rank and of the greatest authority; or Caius Metellus, a man of censorian rank; or their children; or Quintus Metellus Nepos, who at that time was standing for the consulship; or the sons of his sisters, the Luculli, the Servilii, and the Scipios;
for at that time there were many Metelli, or sons of the Metelli, who addressed supplications to you and to your fathers for the return of Quintus Metellus.
And if my own preeminent dignity and most glorious achievements were not of sufficient influence, still the piety of my son, the prayers of my relations, the mourning garb of all the young men, the tears of all the old, had power to move the Roman people to pity.
For the case of Caius Marius, who, after those two most illustrious men of consular rank, is in the recollection of you and of your ancestors the third man of the same rank who, though a man of the most excessive renown, met with the same most unworthy fortune, was very dissimilar to mine.
For he did not return because of the prayers that were offered for his return; but he recalled himself amid the discords of the citizens with an army and by force of arms.
But it was the godlike and unheard-of authority and virtue of Caius Piso, my son-in-law, and of my most unhappy and admirable brother, and their daily tears and mournful appearance, which obtained my safety from you, though I was destitute of all other relations, fortified by no extensive connections, and by no fear of war or of disturbance.
I had but one brother to move your eyes by his mournful appearance, to renew your recollection of and your regret for me by his tears, and he had determined, O Romans, if you did not restore me to him to share my fortunes in exile.
So great was his love towards me, that he thought it would be impious for him to be separated from me, not only in our abode in this life, but also in our tombs.
In my behalf, while I was still present, the senate and twenty thousand men besides changed their apparel; for my sake, after I had departed, you saw only the mourning garb and misery of one man.
He was the one individual who in the forum conducted himself towards me with the dutiful affection of a son; who, by his active kindness, might have been taken for my parent; who in love was, as he always has been, a real brother.
For the mourning and grief of my unhappy wife, and the unceasing sorrow of my admirable daughter, and the regret and childish tears of my little son, were at times hidden from view by their necessary journeys, and to a great extent were confined in the obscurity of their dwelling.
Wherefore your kindness towards us is so much the greater, in that you restored us not to a multitude of relations, but to ourselves.
But, as I had no relations, since I could not make them for myself, to stand forward and avert my misfortune by their entreaties, on the other hand, (and that was no more than my virtue was entitled to procure for me,) I had so many men to urge and promote my restoration, that in the number of them and in the credit derivable from their numbers I far exceeded all those who had previously had a similar fate.
Never was there any mention made in the senate of Publius Popillius, a most illustrious and gallant citizen; nor of Quintus Metellus, a most noble, wise, and consistent man; nor even of Caius Marius, the guardian of your state and of your empire.
Those, my predecessors in this fortune, were recalled by motions proceeding from the tribunes, and by no authority of the senate.
But Marius was not only not restored by the senate, but through the ruin of the senate; nor was it the recollection of his mighty deeds that availed to further the return of Caius Marius, but his own arms and his warlike preparations.
But in my case the senate always requested that its authority might prevail; and it brought about my effectual recall the very first moment that it was practicable, by the numbers in which it assembled, and by its legitimate authority.
There were no commotions of municipal cities or colonies on their return.
But as for me, all Italy three times recalled me by its decrees back to my country.
They were restored after their enemies had been slain, and after a great slaughter of the citizens had taken place; I was brought back when those men by whom I had been driven out had obtained provinces, having as one of my enemies a most excellent and humane man, who, as one of the consuls, himself seconded the motion for my recall; and after my chief enemy, who had lent his voice to the common enemies of the country in order to injure me, was alive only as far as breathing went, but in reality was thrust down below even the dead.
Lucius Opimius, that most gallant consul never addressed either the senate or the people concerning Publius Popillius. Not only did Caius Marius, who was his enemy, never say a word to them about Quintus Metellus, but even the man who succeeded Marius, Marcus Antonius, a most eloquent man, and his colleague Aulus Albinus, both abstained from all mention of him.
But the consuls of last year were continually urged to bring forward a motion in my case; but they, unwilling to appear to be doing so out of interested motives, (because the one was my kinsman, and I had defended the other on a trial for his life,) and fettered by the agreement which they had made about the provinces, endured for the whole of that year the complaints of the senate, the grief of all good men, and the groans of Italy.
But on the first of January, after the orphaned republic had implored the good faith of the consul as her legitimate guardian, Publius Lentulus, the consul, the parent and god of our safety, and life, and fortune, and memory, and name, as soon as he had discharged the solemn duties of religion, thought that there was no human business which ought to occupy him before mine.
And the affair would have been brought to its completion that very day, if that tribune of the people on whom, when I was consul and he quaestor, I had heaped the greatest possible kindnesses, though the whole senatorial body, and Caius Oppius, his father-in-law, a most virtuous man, threw themselves in tears at his feet, had not required a night to consider of it;
and that consideration was devoted, not to giving back the bribe which he had received, as some fancied, but as was afterwards discovered, to getting a larger one.
After that, no other business was transacted in the senate, and as my recall was hindered by various maneuvers, still, as their inclination was plainly shown, the cause of the senate was brought before you in the course of the month of January.
There was this difference between me and my enemies.
I, after I had seen men openly enrolled and registered in the centuries at the tribunal of Aurelius; when I understood that the ancient troops of Catiline had been recalled to hopes of massacre; when I saw that men of that party, of which I myself was accounted one of the chiefs, because some of them envied me, and some feared for themselves, were either betrayers or at least deserters of the cause of my safety; when two consuls, bought by an agreement respecting their provinces, had given themselves up to be leaders to the enemies of the republic, when they saw that their indigence, and their avarice, and their lusts could not be satisfied unless they gave me up bound hand and foot to the enemies of my country; when by edicts and positive commands they forbade the senate and the Roman knights to weep for me, and to change their garments, and address supplications to you; when the bargains made respecting all the provinces, when every sort of covenant made with every sort, of person, and the reconciliation of all quarrels and the treaties between all sorts of jarring interests, were being ratified in my blood; when all virtuous men were willing to die either for me or with me; I was unwilling to take arms and fight for my own safety (as it was quite in my power to do,) since I thought that, whether I conquered or was defeated, it would be a grievous thing for the republic.
But my enemies, when my case was discussed in the month of January, having murdered many citizens, thought it worth while to prevent my return, even at the expense of causing rivers of blood to flow.
Therefore, when I was absent, the republic was in such a state, that you thought that I and it were equally necessary to be restored.
But I thought that there was no republic at all in a city in which the senate had no influence, in which there was impunity for every crime, where there were no courts of justice, but violence and arms bore sway in the forum, where private men were forced to rely on the protection of the walls of their houses, and not on that of the laws, where tribunes of the people were wounded while you were looking on, where men attacked the houses of magistrates with arms and firebrands, while the fasces of the consuls are broken and the temples of the immortal gods attacked by the incendiary.
Therefore, after the republic was banished, I thought that there was no room for me in this city, and if the republic were restored, I had no doubt that it would bring me back in its company.
Could I doubt when I was perfectly certain that Publius Lentulus would be consul the next year, who in the most dangerous crisis of the republic had been curule aedile when I was consul, and had been, as such, the partner of all my counsels and the sharer of all my dangers, that he would use the medicine which was within reach of a consul to restore me to safety who was suffering under wounds inflicted by a consul?
Under his guidance, and while his colleague, a most merciful and excellent man, at first abstained from opposing him, and afterwards cordially cooperated with him, nearly all the rest of the magistrates were advocates of my safety and among them were those men of indomitable courage, of the most eminent virtue, authority, vigour, and resources, Titus Annius and Publius Sextus, who showed the greatest good-will and the most energetic zeal in my behalf; and when the same Publius Lentulus came forward as the prime mover of the bill, and his colleague agreed in the measure proposed, a most numerous senate, with only one dissenting voice, no one daring to intercede with his veto, did honour to my dignity in the most flattering language which it could find, and recommended my safety to you and to all the municipalities and colonies.
And so the consuls, the praetors, the tribunes of the people, the senate, and all Italy continually begged my safety from you, though I was destitute of relations, and not fortified by any extensive connections.
Lastly, every one who was distinguished by any great kindnesses and honours from you, when they were brought before you by Italy, not only expected you to preserve me, but were the asserters, and witnesses, and panegyrists of all my exploits.
The chief of these men who came forward to exhort and to entreat you in my behalf was Cnaeus Pompeius, the greatest man of all who live, or who ever have lived, or who ever shall live, for virtue, and wisdom, and true glory; who, as a single man, has conferred on me, a single private individual, all the same benefits which he has conferred on the entire republic, namely, safety, ease, and dignity.
And what he said was, as I have understood, divided under three heads.
In the first place, he told you that the republic had been saved by my counsels; and he connected my cause with the general safety; and he encouraged you to defend the authority of the senate, the constitution of the state, and the fortunes of a deserving citizen: and, in summing up, he laid it down that you were entreated by the senate, entreated by the Roman knights, entreated by all Italy: and, lastly, he himself did not only entreat you for my safety, but prayed to you in a most suppliant manner.
I owe this man, O Romans, such a debt as it is hardly right for one man to owe to another.
You, following the counsels of this man, and the opinion of Publius Lentulus, and the authority of the senate, have replaced me in that position in which I had been through your kindness, and that by the votes of the same centuries by which you originally placed me there.
At the same time you heard from the same place men of the greatest eminence most accomplished and honourable citizens, the chief men of the city, all the men of consular rank, all the men of praetorian rank, say the same thing that it was clear by the testimony of everybody, that the republic had been preserved by me alone.
Therefore, when Publius Servilius, a man of the greatest dignity, and a most accomplished citizen, had said that it was through my labours that the republic had been handed over to the magistrates in a sound condition, all the rest declared their assent to that statement.
But you heard at that time not only the authoritative declaration, but the sworn evidence of a most illustrious man, Lucius Gellius, who, because he was aware that his fleet had been tampered with, and that he himself had been in great danger, said in your assembly that if I had not been consul when I was, the republic would have been utterly destroyed.
I now, O Romans, having been restored to myself, to my friends, and to the republic, owing to the evidence of so many men, by this authority of the senate by such great unanimity of all Italy by such great zeal on the part of all good men by the particular agency of Publius Lentulus, with the cooperation of all the other magistrates while Cnaeus Pompeius was begging for my recall, and while all men favoured it and even the immortal gods showed their approbation of it by the fertility and abundance and cheapness of the crops, promise you, O Romans, all that I can do.
In the first place, I promise that I will always feel that reverential attachment to the Roman people which the most religious men are accustomed to feel for the immortal gods, and that your deity shall for the whole of my life be considered by me equally important and holy with that of the immortal gods.
In the second place, since it is the republic herself that has brought me back into the city, I promise that I will on no occasion fail the republic.
But if any one thinks that either my inclinations are changed, or my courage weakened, or my spirit broken, he is greatly mistaken.
All that the violence, and injustice, and the frenzy of wicked men could take from me, it has taken away, stripped me of, and destroyed; that which cannot be taken away from a brave man remains and shall remain.
I saw that most brave man, a fellow-citizen of my own municipal town, Caius Marius, since, as if by some fatal necessity, we both had not only to contend with those who wished to destroy all these things, but with fortune also still I saw him, when he was in extreme old age, with a spirit not only not broken on account of the greatness of his misfortunes, but even strengthened and refreshed by it.
And I heard him say that he had been miserable when he was deprived of his country which he had delivered from siege; when he heard that his property was taken possession of and plundered by his enemies; when he saw his young son a sharer of the same calamity; when, up to his neck in the marshes, he only preserved his body and his life by the aid of the Minturnensians, who thronged to the place and pitied him; when, having crossed over to Africa in a little boat, he had arrived as a beggar and a suppliant among those people to whom he himself had given kingdoms; but that now that he had recovered his dignity he would take care, as all those things which he had lost had been restored to him, still to preserve that fortitude of mind which he never had lost.
But there is this difference between myself and him, that he used those means in which he was most powerful, namely his arms, in order to revenge himself on his enemies.
I, too, will use the instrument to which I am accustomed; since it is in war and sedition that there is room for his qualities, but in peace and tranquillity that there is scope for mine.
And although he, in his angry mind, laboured for nothing but avenging himself on his enemies, I will only think of my enemies as much as the republic herself allows me.
Lastly, O Romans, since they are altogether four classes of men who injured me, one of them, those who were most hostile to me out of hatred to the republic, because I had preserved it against their will; another, those who most wickedly betrayed me under pretence of friendship; a third, those who envied my credit and dignity, because they, from their laziness, could not obtain the same honours; the fourth was composed of those men who, while they ought to have been guardians of the republic, sold (as far as was in their power) my safety, the constitution of the state, and the dignity of its empire; I will revenge myself on each class in proportion as I have been challenged by each on wicked citizens, by conducting the republic successfully; on my perfidious friends, by trusting them in nothing, and taking every sort of precaution against them; on the envious, by obeying virtue and glory; on the buyers of provinces, by recalling them home, and by exacting from them an account of their conduct in those provinces.
Although I feel greater anxiety as to how I am to show my gratitude to you who have deserved excellently well of me than how I am to chastise the injustice and cruelty of my enemies.
In truth the means of revenging an injury are easier than those of requiting a kindness; because there is less trouble in being superior to the wicked than in being equal to the good;
and also because it is not so necessary to requite bad men as good men for what you are indebted to them.
Hatred may either be appeased by entreaties, or may be laid aside out of consideration for the emergencies of the republic and the general advantage, or it may be restrained by the difficulty of avenging oneself, or it may be worn out by the antiquity of the injury which gave rise to it; but a man ought not to require to be entreated to show attention to virtuous men,
Nor is the excuse of difficulty to be admitted; nor is it just to limit the recollection of a kindness to a certain time or to a fixed day.
Lastly, he who is somewhat indifferent about seeking revenge is soon openly praised; but he is most exceedingly blamed who is in the least slow in requiting such benefits as you have showered on me; and he must inevitably be called, not only ungrateful, which itself is serious enough, but impious also.
And the principle of requiting a kindness is different from that of repaying money; because he who keeps the money does not pay it, he who has repaid it has not get it; but in the case of gratitude, he who repays it still keeps it and he who keeps it pays it.
Wherefore, I will cherish the memory of your kindness with undying affection, not only as long as I live and breathe, but even after I am dead, the memorials of your kindness to me shall still endure.
And in showing my gratitude, this I do promise you, (and this I will always perform,) that diligence shall never be wanting to me in deliberating on the affairs of the republic, nor courage in repelling dangers from the republic, nor loyalty and honesty in plainly declaring my opinions, nor freedom in opposing men's inclinations when it is for the interests of the republic to do so, nor industry in enduring labour, nor the grateful zeal of my heart in promoting everything which may be advantageous to you.
And this care, O Romans, shall be fixed in my mind for ever, in order that I may appear, not only to you, who hold in my heart the power and divine character of the immortal gods, but also to your posterity and to all nations, to be entirely worthy of that state which, by the unanimous suffrages of its citizens, decided that it could not maintain its own dignity, unless it recovered me.
Many things, O priests, have been devised and established with divine wisdom by our ancestors; but no action of theirs was ever more wise than their determination that the same men should superintend both what relates to the religious worship due to the immortal gods, and also what concerns the highest interests of the state, so that they might preserve the republic as the most honourable and eminent of the citizens, by governing it well, and as priests by wisely interpreting the requirements of religion.
But if there has ever been a time when an important cause has depended on the decision and power of the priests of the Roman people, this indeed is that cause; being such that the dignity of the whole republic, the safety of all the citizens, their lives, their liberties, their altars, their hearths, their household gods, their properties and condition as citizens, and their homes, all appear to be committed and entrusted to your wisdom integrity, and power.
You have got to decide this day whether you prefer for the future to deprive frantic and profligate magistrates of the protection of wicked and unprincipled citizens, or even to arm them with the cloak of religion and of the respect due to the immortal gods.
For if that pest and conflagration of the republic succeeds in defending his own mischievous and fatal tribunate by appeals to divine religion, when he cannot maintain it by any considerations of human equity, then we must seek for other ceremonies, for other ministers of the immortal gods, for other interpreters of the requirements of religion.
But if those things which were done by the madness of wicked men in the republic at a time when it was oppressed by one party, deserted by another, and betrayed by a third, are annulled by your authority and your wisdom, O priests, then we shall have cause rightly and deservedly to praise the wisdom of our ancestors in selecting the most honourable men of the state for the priesthood.
But since that madman has thought that he should find a ready road to your attention by blaming the sentiments that I in the last few days have expressed in the senate concerning the republic, I will deviate from the natural arrangement of my speech, and I will make a reply to what I will not call the speech of that furious fellow, (for that is more than he is capable of,) but to his abuse, that being an employment which he has fortified himself in the practice of by his own intolerable bad temper, and by the length of time that he has been allowed to indulge it with impunity.
And in the first place, I ask you this, O you insane and frantic man, what excessive punishment for your wickednesses and crimes is it that distracts you so as to make you think that these men men of their high character, who support the dignity of the republic, not only by their wisdom, but also by their dignified appearance are angry with me, because in delivering my opinion I connected the safety of the citizens with the honour of Cnaeus Pompeius, and that they are likely at this present time to have different feelings with respect to the general interests of religion from those which they entertained when I was absent?
"Oh," says he, "you had the advantage before the priests, but now you must inevitably get worst off since you have had recourse to the people."
Is it so?
Will you transfer that which is the greatest defect in the ignorant multitude, namely, its fickleness and inconstancy, and change of opinion, as frequent as the changes of the weather, to these men, whose gravity protects them from inconsistency, while their fixed and definite principles of religion and the antiquity of precedents, and the authority of written records and monuments, effectually deters them from all capricious change of sentiment?
"Are you," says he, "the man whom the senate was unable to do without? whom the good lamented? whom the republic regretted? by whose restoration we expected that the authority of the senate was restored? and who destroyed that authority the very first thing you did?"
I am not at present speaking of my own matters; I will first of all reply to your impudence.
Did you then, O you deadly pest of the republic, by means of the sword and arms, by the terror of an armed force, by the wickedness of the consuls, and the threats of most audacious men, by enlisting slaves, by besieging the temples, by occupying the forum, by oppressing the senate, contrive to compel the departure of that citizen from his home and from his country, in order to prevent actual battles between the virtuous and wicked citizens, though you now confess that he was regretted and sent for back and recalled by the senate, by all good men, and by the whole of Italy, as the only means of preserving the republic?
But on that day of disturbance you ought not, says he, "to have come into the senate, you ought not to have entered the Capitol."
But I did not come, and I kept in my own house as long as that disturbance lasted; while it was notorious that your slaves had come with you armed into the Capitol, ready for plunder and for the massacre of all good men, with all that band of wicked and profligate partisans of yours.
And when this was reported to me, I know that I remained at home, and would not give you and your gladiators power of renewing the massacre.
After news was brought to me that the Roman people had assembled at the Capitol, because of their fear for, and difficulty of procuring corn, and that the ministers of your crimes had been frightened and had fled, some having dropped their swords, and some having had them taken from them, I came forward not only without any armed band, but with only a very few friends.
Should I, when Publius Lentulus the consul, who had conferred the greatest benefits on me and on the republic, when Quintus Metellus, your brother, O Metellus, who, though he had been my enemy, had still preferred my safety and dignity to any desire to keep alive our quarrel, and to your entreaties that he would do so, sent for me to the senate, when that great multitude of citizens, who had lately shown such zeal in my behalf, entreated me by name to show my gratitude to them, should I, I say, have declined to come forward, especially when it was notorious that you with your band of runaway slaves had already left the place?
Have you dared to call me, the guardian and defender of the Capitol and of every temple the enemy of the Capitol, because, when the two consuls were holding the senate in the Capitol, I came thither?
Is there any time at which it can be discreditable to have attended the senate?
or was that business which was then being transacted of such a nature that I was bound to repudiate the affair itself, and to condemn those who were promoting it?
First, I say that it is the duty of a virtuous senator at all times to attend the senate; and I do not agree with those who determine that they themselves will not come to the senate at unfavourable seasons, and who do not understand that this excessive obstinacy of theirs is exceedingly pleasant and acceptable to those men whose wishes they intend to counteract.
But some departed out of fear, because they thought that they could not remain with safety in the senate.
I do not name them, nor do I ask whether they had any real reason for fearing anything.
I imagine that every one had a right to form his own opinion as to what grounds he had for fear.
Do you ask why I was not afraid?
Why, because it was known that you had gone away.
Do you ask why, when some good men thought that they could not remain with safety in the senate, I did not think so too?
or why, when I thought that it was impossible for me to remain in the city at all with safety, they did not think so too?
Are then others to be allowed, and rightly enough, to have no fear for themselves at a time when I am in danger; and yet am I bound to be afraid not only when I am myself in peril, but when others are also?
Or am I to be blamed because I did not express an opinion condemnatory of both the consuls?
Ought I then to condemn those men, of all men in the world, by whose law it was brought about that I, who had never been condemned and who had deserved well of the republic, should be saved from enduring the punishment of condemned criminals?
Was I, of all men in the world, I who had been restored to my former dignity by their means, to denounce by my expressed opinion the admirable sentiments of those men, who, even if they had been in error, ought to have been borne with by me and by all good men, on account of their exceeding good-will displayed in ensuring my preservation?
And what were the opinions which I delivered?
In the first place, that one which the common conversation of the people had already previously fixed in our minds; in the second place, that one which had been discussed in the senate on the preceding days; and thirdly, that which the senate in a very full house adopted, expressing its agreement with me; so that so sudden or novel proposition was brought forward by me, and moreover, if there be any fault in the opinion, it is sot more the fault of the individual who advanced it than of all those men who approved of it.
"But the decision of the senate was not free, because of the fear in which they were."
If you make out that they who left it were in fear, at least grant that they who remained were not alarmed.
But if no free decision could be come to without the presence of those men who were absent at that time, I say that the motion about framing a resolution of the senate began to be made when every one was present; it was carried by acclamation by the entire senate.
But I ask, since I am the prime mover in and the chief cause of this vote, what fault is found with the vote itself?
Was there not good reason for adopting an unprecedented plan?
Was not I as much concerned as any one in that matter?
or, had we any other resource?
What circumstances, what reasons could there be of greater consequence than famine? than sedition? than the designs of you and your partisans?
who thought that, if an opportunity was given them of inflaming the minds of the ignorant, you, under the pretence afforded by the scarcity of provisions, would be able to renew your wicked and fatal practices.
As for grain, some of the countries which usually supply it had not got it; some had sent it into other countries, I imagine because of the great variety of sellers; and some were keeping it back, shut up in their stores, in order suddenly to send it, so that the supply might be more acceptable if they seemed to come to our aid when we were in a state of actual famine.
The matter was not one of uncertain opinions, it was a case of actually existing danger, present to our eyes; it was not one which we were looking forward to in conjecture, but one which we were actually beholding by present experience.
For when the scarcity was getting more severe, so that it was actually want and famine that was dreaded, and not mere dearness of price, there was a rush towards the Temple of Concord, when the consul Metellus summoned the senate to meet in that place.
And if that was the genuine effect of the grief of men suffering under famine, certainly the consuls had good reason to undertake the affair, certainly the senate had good reason to adopt some determination or other.
But if the scarcity was the pretext, and if you in reality were the exciter and kindler of sedition, ought we not all to have striven to take away all shadow of pretext for your madness?
What, if both these causes existed, if there was both famine to excite men, and you too like a nail working into this ulcer?
was there not all the more need to apply some remedy, which might put an end to both the evil caused by nature, and to the other mischief imported into the case?
There was then both present dearness and impending famine; that is not enough; men were attacked with stones.
If that arose from the indignation of the common people, without any one having stirred them up, it is a great misfortune; but if, it was caused by the instigation of Publius Clodius, it is only the habitual wickedness of a wicked man:
if both these causes existed, if there was both a fact sufficient of itself to excite the feelings of the multitude, and if there were leaders of sedition ready and forearmed; then, does it not seem natural for the republic to have had recourse to the protection of the consul and the loyalty of the senate?
But it is quite plain that one of these causes did exist; that there was a difficulty of obtaining provisions, and an extreme scarcity of grain, so that men were afraid not only of a continuance of high prices, but of actual famine.
No one denies it.
But I do not wish you, O priests, to suspect that that enemy of all tranquillity and peace was likely to seize on this as a pretext for conflagration, and massacre, and rapine, unless you see it proved.
Who are the men who were openly named in the senate by Quintus Metellus, your brother, O Metellus, the consul, by whom he said that he had been attacked with stones and actually hit?
He named Lucius Sergius and Marcus Lollius.
Who is that Lollius?
A man who is not even at this moment by your side without his sword; who, while you were tribune of the people, demanded (I will say nothing of his designs against myself) to have the murder of Cnaeus Pompeius entrusted to him.
Who is Sergius?
The armour-bearer of Catiline, your own body-guard, the standard-bearer of sedition, the exciter of the shopkeepers, a man who has been convicted of assault, an assassin, a stoner of men, a man who has depopulated the forum, and blockaded the senate-house.
With these leaders and others like them, when you, at the time when provisions were dear, under pretence of espousing the cause of the poor and ignorant, were preparing for sudden attacks on the consuls, on the senate, on the property and fortunes of the, rich; when it was impossible for you to find safety if affairs remained in a tranquil state; when, the leaders being all desperate men, you had your bands of profligates regularly enrolled and distributed into decuries, did it not behoove the senate to take good care that that fatal firebrand did not fall upon these vast materials for sedition?
There was, therefore, good cause for adopting an unusual determination.
See now whether or not I was the person who had the principal share in it.
Who was it whom that friend of yours, Sergius, whom Lollius, whom the other rascals named when they were throwing the stones?
who was it that they said ought to provide them with grain?
was it not I?
What was it that that nocturnal mob of boys which had been trained by you kept demanding?
They were demanding grain of me; as if I superintended the grain-market; or as if I were keeping back any grain in store; or as if, in fact, I had any management of, or influence whatever in, any affairs of that class at all.
But the fellow who was thirsting for slaughter had published my name to the artisans, and to the ignorant mob.
When the senate, in a very full house assembled in the temple of the all-good and all-powerful Jupiter, had passed a decree touching my dignity with only one dissenting voice, on a sudden, on that very day, a most unexpected cheapness followed a time when grain had been excessively dear.
Some said, (and I myself am of that opinion,) that the immortal gods had shown their approbation of my return by this exercise of their power.
But some traced that fact back, connecting it with this argument and opinion, that, as all hopes of tranquillity and concord appeared to depend on my return, and as there was an incessant dread of sedition connected with my absence, so now that all fear of contest was almost at an end, they thought that the state of the grain-market was altered;
and, because it again had become more unmanageable after my return, then grain was demanded of me, on whose arrival virtuous men were in the habit of saying that there would be cheapness.
Lastly, my name was pronounced not only by your band of partisans at your instigation, but even after your forces had been routed and scattered, I was summoned by name to the senate by the whole Roman people, who at that time were assembled around the Capitol, though on that day I was far from well.
Being expected, I came.
After many opinions had been already pronounced, I was asked mine.
I delivered one very advantageous to the republic, and at the same time necessary for my own interests.
Abundance of grain and cheapness of price was demanded of me; as if I had any influence in producing such a state of things as that.
I was pressed by eager expostulation from many good men.
I was unable to support the abuse of the wicked.
I proposed to entrust the business to an influential friend, not in order to impose a burden on one to whom I was under such heavy obligations, (for I would rather have sunk under it myself, than done that,) but because I saw, what every one else saw, that, whatever we promised in behalf of Cnaeus Pompeius, he would most easily accomplish by his integrity, wisdom, virtue, and authority, and by his invariable good-fortune.
Therefore, whether the immortal gods give this to the Roman people as the fruit of my return, that, as on my departure there ensued a want of grain, and famine, and devastation, and bloodshed, and conflagration, and pillage, and impunity for all crimes, and flight, and terror, and discord, so my return is followed by fertility of the lands, by abundant harvests, by hopes of tranquillity, by peaceful dispositions on the part of the citizens, by a restoration of the courts of justice and of the laws, while unanimity on the part of the people and the authority of the senate seem to have been brought back in my company;
or, if the fact is that I, on my arrival, was bound, in return for such kindness, to do something for the Roman people by my prudence, authority and diligence;
then I do promise, and undertake, and pledge myself to do it.
I say no more.
This, I say, which is sufficient for the present occasion, that the republic shall not, on any pretence connected with the price of grain, fall into that danger into which some people endeavoured to bring it.
Are then my sentiments found fault with in this business which fell especially to my share?
I rescued affairs of the greatest consequence from the mischief of the most imminent danger; and I saved not only it, but you also, from massacre, and conflagration, and devastation.
No one denies this; as to the pretext of dearness there was added that spy of the general misery, who always lit the firebrand of his guilt in the misfortunes of the republic.
He says that nothing ought to have been decreed irregularly to any one.
I do not at present make the same reply to you that I make to the rest, That many wars, and these wars of the greatest danger and of the greatest importance, both by land and sea, have been entrusted to Cnaeus Pompeius out of the regular order.
And if any one repents of those measures, he must also repent of the victory of the Roman people.
I do not deal with you in this manner.
I can address this argument to those men, who state that if any matter must be entrusted to one individual, then they would rather entrust it to Cnaeus Pompeius than to any one, but that they make a rule of never entrusting anything to any one in an irregular manner; still, after it has been entrusted to Pompeius, that they then vindicate and uphold the measure, as is due to the dignity of the man.
From praising the statements of these men I am hindered by the triumphs of Cnaeus Pompeius, by which he (though it was quite out of the regular order of things that he was summoned to defend his country) increased the reputation of the Roman people, and crowned their empire with honour.
At the same time I praise their firmness, which is a virtue which I have need to avail myself of, since it was on my proposition that he was appointed, quite out of the regular routine, to conduct the war against Mithridates and Tigranes.
But still there are some points which I can argue with them; but still, how great is your impudence, when you dare to say that nothing ought to be given to any one out of the regular routine!
You who, when, by an iniquitous law, for some unknown cause you had confiscated the property of Ptolemy, King of Cyprus, the brother of the King of Alexandria, who was reigning by the same right as he was, and had involved the Roman people in the crime, when you had sent a band of robbers from this empire to ravage his kingdom, and goods, and property, though there had been a long alliance and friendship between us and his father, and grandfather, and still more remote ancestors, appointed Marcus Cato to superintend the carrying away of his money, and the managing the war if any individual was found hardy enough to defend his own property.
Will you say, "Yes, but what a man Cato was!
A most religious, most prudent, most gallant man; the firmest friend to the republic, a citizen of a most marvellous and almost unique virtue, and wisdom, and purity of life."
Very fine, but what is all that to you, when you say that it is untrue that any one ought to be appointed to any public duty out of the regular course?
And in this matter I am only convicting you of inconsistency; who in the case of this very Cato, whom you did not so much promote out of regard for his dignity, as get out of the way lest he might hinder your wickedness, whom you had exposed to your Sergii, and Lollii, and Titii, and your other leaders in massacre and conflagration, whom you yourself had called the executioner of the citizens, the chief murderer of men who had never been condemned, the very fountain of cruelty, you still by your motion conferred this honour and command on him out of the regular course,
and you behaved with such violence, that you were wholly unable to disguise your object and, the system of wickedness which you had laid down for yourself.
You read letters in the assembly which you said had been sent to you by Caius Caesar.
And when you proceeded to argue that this was a proof of intimacy, because he only used the names of himself and you, and did not add "proconsul," or "tribune of the people," and then began to congratulate you that you had got Marcus Cato out of the way of your tribuneship for the remainder of the time, and that you had also taken away for the future the power of giving extraordinary commissions;
letters which he never sent to you at all, or which, if he did send them, he certainly never meant to be read in the public assembly;
at all events, whether he sent them or whether you forged them, your intention with respect to the honours conferred upon Cato was revealed by the reading of those letters.
But, however, I will say no more about Cato, whose eminent virtue, and dignity, and integrity, and moderation in that business which he executed, appear like a screen to veil the iniquity of your law and of your argument.
What more need I say?
Who was it who gave to the most infamous man that has ever existed, to the most wicked and polluted of all men, that rich and fertile Syria?
Who gave him a war to carry on against nations who were in a state of profound peace?
Who gave him the money which was destined for the purchase of lands and which had been taken by violence out of the fruits of the achievements of Caesar?
Who gave him an unlimited command?
And, indeed, when you had given him Cilicia, you altered the terms of your bargain with him, and you transferred Cilicia to the praetor, again quite out of the regular course.
And then, when the bribe had been increased, you gave Syria to Gabinius expressly naming him.
What more?
Did you not, naming him expressly, deliver over, bound and fettered, to Lucius Piso, the foulest, the most cruel, the most treacherous of men, the most infamous of all men, as stigmatised for every sort of wickedness and lust, free nations, who had been declared free by numerous resolutions of the senate, and even by a recent law of your own son-in-law?
Did not you, after the recompense for your service and the bribe of a province had been paid by him at my expense, still divide the treasury with him?
Is it so?
Did you annul the arrangement of the consular provinces, which Caius Gracchus, than whom there hardly ever lived a man more devoted to the people, not only abstained from taking from the senate, but even passed a solemn law to establish the principle that they were to be settled every year by the senate; did you, I say, disturb that arrangement, and that too after it had been formally settled according to the Sempronian law?
You gave the provinces, in an irregular manner, without casting lots, not to the consuls, but to the pests of the republic, expressly naming them.
And shall we be found fault with, because we have appointed a most illustrious man, who has often been selected before on occasions of the greatest danger to the republic, (expressly naming him,) to superintend a matter of the most urgent importance, and which was previously in an almost desperate condition?
What more shall I say?
If, then, amid the darkness and impenetrable clouds and storms which were then lowering above the republic, when you had driven the senate from the helm and turned the people out of the ship, and while you yourself, like a captain of pirates, were hastening on with all your sails set, with your most infamous band of robbers; if at that time you had been able to carry the resolutions which you proposed, and punished, and brought forward, and sold, what place in the whole world would have been free from the extraordinary magistrates and commanders invested with their power by the great Clodius?
But at last the indignation of Cnaeus Pompeius, (I will say, even in his hearing, what I have felt, and still do feel what ever may be the way in which he takes it,) the indignation I say, of Cnaeus Pompeius, which had been too long concealed and slumbering, being at last aroused, came on a sudden to the aid of the republic, and raised the city crushed with misfortunes, dumb, weakened, and broken spirited through fear to some hope of recovering its liberty and former dignity.
And was this man not to be appointed to superintend the providing the city with grain?
You, forsooth, by your law abandoned all the grain, whether belonging to private individuals or to the state, all the provinces which supply grain, and all the contractors, and all the keys of the granaries, to that most impure of gluttons, the taster of your lusts, to that most needy and most impious man, Sextus Clodius, the companion of your family, who by his tongue alienated even your sister from you.
And it was by this action of yours that dearness was first produced, and afterwards scarcity.
Famine, conflagration, bloodshed, and pillage were impending.
Your insane frenzy was threatening the fortunes and property of every man.
That ill-omened pest of the state even complains that the grain should have been taken out of the impure mouth of Sextus Clodius, and that the republic in its extremest peril should have implored the aid of that man by whom it recollected that it had often been preserved, and had its power extended.
Clodius thinks that nothing ought to be done out of the regular course.
What!
what sort of law is it that you say that you passed about me, you parricide, you fratricide, you murderer of your sister; did you not pass that out of the regular course?
Was it lawful for you to pass, I will not say a law, but a wicked private bill, concerning the ruin of a citizen, the preserver of the republic, as all gods and men have long since agreed to call him, and, as you yourself confess, when he was not only uncondemned but even unimpeached, amid the mourning of the senate and the lamentation of all good men, rejecting the prayers of all Italy, while the republic lay oppressed and captive at your feet?
And was it not lawful for me, when the Roman people implored me, when the senate requested me, when the critical state of the republic demanded it of me, to deliver an opinion concerning the safety of the Roman people?
And if that opinion the dignity of Cnaeus Pompeius was increased, in connection with the common advantage, certainly I ought to be praised if I seemed to have given my vote for honour of that than who had brought his influence to aid in the ensuring of my safety.
Let men cease cease, I say, from hoping that now that I have been restored, I can be undermined by the same contrivances by which they formerly smote me when I was flourishing.
For what pair of men of consular dignity were ever more united in friendship in this state than Cnaeus Pompeius and I?
Who has ever spoken more honourably or more repeatedly of his dignity before the Roman people or to the senate than I have?
What labour was there so great, or what enmity so formidable, or what contest so arduous, that I was unwilling to encounter it for the sake of his dignity?
and what honour that could be paid me by him, what panegyric of my glory, what recompense for my goodwill was ever omitted by him?
This union of ours, this unanimity and concert in managing the affairs of the republic successfully, this most delightful agreement in life and all its duties, certain men, by false reports of conversations and false accusations, broke, interrupted; going to him, and warning him to be afraid of me, to guard against me, and at the same time telling me that he was hostile to me above all men: so that I had net sufficient confidence to ask of him what it was desirable for me to ask, nor did he, having been made sore by the jealousies and wickedness of certain individuals, promise me with sufficient freedom what my necessities required.
A great price has been paid for my error, O priests, so that I am not only grieved for my folly, but ashamed of it too; since, though it was not some sudden and accidental occasion, but many labors of long standing, encountered and undertaken long before, which had united me with a most gallant and most illustrious man, I still suffered myself to be led away to abandon such a friendship, and did not perceive who they were whom it became me either to oppose as open enemies, or to distrust as treacherous friends.
Let them now at length cease to try and excite me with the same language as before: "What is that man about?
Does not he know how great his influence is, what great achievements be has performed with what great honour he has been restored?
Why does he do honour to the man by whom he was deserted?"
But I neither think that I was deserted at that time, but rather surrendered; nor do I think it needful for me to explain what at the time of that unhappiness to the republic was done against me nor how, nor by whose instrumentality it was done.
If it was beneficial to the republic that that alone, as the victim offered for the general safety, should quaff that most unworthy cup of calamity, it may be useful also for me to conceal and be silent respecting the men by whose wickedness it was brought about.
But yet it is the part of an ungrateful man to be silent.
Therefore I will most willingly proclaim that Cnaeus Pompeius laboured with all his zeal and influence as much as any one of you, and with all his means, and labour, and by entreaty, and even at his own personal risk, to promote my safety.
This man, O Publius Lentulus, was present at all your counsels, while you were thinking of nothing day and night except my safety.
He cooperated with you as a most influential adviser in planning the conduct to be pursued, as a most faithful ally in preparing for it, and as a most fearless assistant in executing it.
It was he who visited all the municipalities and colonies; it was he who implored the assistance of all Italy, which was eager to afford it; it was he who in the senate was the first person to deliver his opinion, and when he had delivered it there, he then also entreated the Roman people to preserve me.
Wherefore, you may desist from that language which you have been using, namely, that the dispositions of the priests were changed after my delivering the opinion which I did about the grain.
As if they had any different opinion from what I myself had about Cnaeus Pompeius, or as if they were ignorant what I ought to do either with regard to the expectation of the Roman people, or to the services which I have received from Cnaeus Pompeius, or to my own circumstances and condition;
or as if even, if my sentiments had perchance been offensive to any one of the priests, though I know for a certainty that the contrary was the case, any priest was on that account going to decide about religion, or any citizen about the republic, in any other manner than the laws respecting religious ceremonies compelled the one, or the interests and safety of the republic compelled the other.
I am aware, O priests, that I have said more things which are foreign to this cause, than either your opinion is likely to approve of, or than my own inclination prompted.
But I was anxious to be acquitted in your eyes; and, further, your kindness in listening to me with attention carried me on to say more than I had intended.
But I will make amends for this by the brevity of that part of the speech which relates to the actual matter now brought under your examination; and as the affair is divided into two heads, one relating to the laws of religion, and the other to the laws of the state, I will pass over the question of religion, which would take a longer time to discuss, and speak to the point of what is the law of the state.
For what can be so arrogant as for a layman to endeavour to lecture the college of priests about religion, about divine affairs, and ceremonies, and sacrifices; or so foolish as for a man, if he has found anything of consequence in your books, to take up time in detailing it to you; or so superfluous, as to seek to acquire learning on those points concerning which our ancestors have laid down the principle that you alone have knowledge, and that you alone ought to be consulted?
I say that it was not possible, according to our common rights, and according to those laws which are in force in this city, for any citizen to be exposed to such disaster as mine without a formal trial.
I say that this was the law in this state even at the time when the kings existed; I say that this was the principle handed down to us from our ancestors; I say, moreover, that this is the inalienable characteristic of a free state, that no infringement on the liberties or property of a citizen can take place without the formal decision of the senate, or of the people, or of those persons who have been appointed as judges in each separate matter.
Do you not see that I am destroying all your proceedings by the roots?
that I am arguing, what is manifest, that you did nothing whatever according to law, that you were not a tribune of the people at all? I say this, that you are a patrician.
I say so before the priests; the augurs are present.
I take my stand on the common public law.
What, O priests is the law concerning adoption?
Why that he may adopt children who is no longer able to have children himself, and who failed in having them when he was of an age to expect it.
What reason, then, any one has for adopting children, what considerations of family or dignity are involved
what principles of religion are concerned, are questions which are accustomed to be put to the college of priests.
What if all these circumstances are found to exist in that adoption?
The person who adopts him is twenty years old; a minor adopts a senator.
Does he do so for the sake of having children?
He is of an age to have them of his own.
He has a wife; he has actually got children of his own.
The father, then, will be disinheriting his own son.
What?
why should all the sacred rites of the Clodian family perish, as far as it depends on you?
And that must have been the idea of all the priests when you were adopted.
Unless, perchance, the question was put to you in this way, whether you were intending to disturb the republic by seditions, and whether you wished to be adopted with that object, not in order to become that man's son, but only in order to be made a tribune of the people, and by that means utterly to overthrow the state?
You answered, I presume, that your object was only to be made a tribune.
That appeared to the priests to be a sufficient reason.
They approved of it.
No questions were asked about the age of the man who was adopting you; as was done in the case of Cnaeus Aufidius and Marcus Pupius, each of whom, within our recollection, when extremely old, adopted as sons, the one Orestes, and the other Piso.
And these adoptions, like others, more than I can count, were followed by the inheritance of the name and property and sacred rites of the family.
You are not Fonteius, as you ought to be, nor the heir of your new father; nor, though you have lost your right to the sacred ceremonies of your own family, have you availed yourself of those which belong to you by adoption.
And so, having thrown the ceremonies of religion into confusion, having polluted both families, both the one which you have abandoned and the one which you have entered, having violated the legitimate practices of the Romans with respect to guardianships and inheritances, you have been made, contrary to all the requirements of religion, the son of that man of whom you were old enough to be the father.
I am speaking before the priests; I say that that adoption did not take place according to the sacerdotal law.
In the first place, because your respective ages are such that the man who has adopted you as your father might, as far as his age went, have been your son; in the second place, because a question is usually put as to the reason for the adoption, in order that the adopter may be a person who is seeking by regular and sacerdotal law that which by the ordinary process of nature he is no longer able to obtain; and that he may adopt a son in such a manner, as to in nowise impair the dignity of the families or the reverence belonging to their sacred ceremonies; and, above all things, that no false pretence, or fraud, or trickery, may creep in; so that this fictitious adoption of a son may appear to imitate as far as possible the real case of children being born to a man.
But what greater false pretence can there be than for a beardless young man, a vigorous man and a husband, to come forward, and to say that he wishes to adopt as his own son a senator of the Roman people, and for all men to know and see that this senator is adopted, not in order to become really the son of the plebeian, but merely in order that he may quit the patrician body, and be made a tribune of the people?
And all that without any disguise.
For in this case the adopted son was immediately emancipated, lest he should really have become the son of him who adopted him.
Why then is he adopted at all?
Only approve of this sort of adoption, and in a moment the sacred ceremonies of every family, of which you ought to be the guardians, will be abolished, and not one patrician will be left.
For why should any one be willing to be incapable of being made a tribune of the people? to have his power of standing for the consulship narrowed?
and, while he might arrive at the priesthood, not to arrive at it because there is not a vacancy at the moment for a patrician?
Whenever anything happens to any one to make it more convenient for him to be a plebeian, he will be adopted in the same manner as Clodius.
And so in a short time the Roman people will neither have a king of the sacrifices, nor flamines, nor Salii, nor one half of the rest of the priests, nor any one who has a right to open the comitia centuriata, or curiata; and the auspices of the Roman people must come to an end if no patrician magistrates are created, as there will be no interrex, for he must be a patrician, and must be nominated by a patrician.
I said before the priests, that that adoption had not been approved by any decree of this college; that it had been executed contrary to every provision of the sacerdotal law; that it ought to be considered as no adoption at all; and if there is an end to that, you see at once that there is an end likewise of the whole of your tribuneship.
I come now to the augurs and if they have any secret books I do not inquire into them; I am not very curious about inquiring into the principles of the augurs.
I know, what I have learnt in common with all the people, what answers they have frequently given in the public assemblies.
They say that it is contrary to divine law for any public business to be brought before the people when any proper officers observing the heavens.
Will you venture to deny that, on the day when the Lex curiata concerning you is said to have been passed, the magistrates were observing the heavens?
A man is here present in court, of the most eminent wisdom, and dignity, and authority, Marcus Bibulus.
I assert that on that very day he, as consul, was observing the heavens.
"are then the acts of Caius Caesar, that most admirable citizen, invalid in your opinion?"
By no means; for there is not one of them which concerns me in the least, nor anything else except these weapons which by that man's proceedings are hurled at me.
But the matter of the auspices, which I am now touching on with extreme brevity, has been handled in this manner by you.
You, when your tribuneship was in danger and was falling to pieces as it were, all of a sudden came forward as a patron of the auspices; you brought forward Marcus Bibulus and the augurs into the assembly; you questioned the augurs, and they replied that when any magistrates was observing the heavens, no business could be transacted in the assembly of the people.
You questioned Marcus Bibulus, and he told you in reply that he had been observing the heavens; and he also said in the public assembly, when he was brought forward there by your brother Appius, that you were no tribune of the people at all, because you had been adopted contrary to the auspices.
In the succeeding months your language constantly was, that everything which Caius Caesar had done ought to be rescinded by the senate, because they had been done in disregard of the auspices; and if they were rescinded, you said that you would bring me back on your own shoulders into the city as the guardian of the city.
See now, O priests, the insanity of the man when by means of his tribuneship he was connected to such an extent with the acts of Caesar.
If the priests deciding according to the law relating to sacrifices, and the augurs according to the religious observance due to the auspices, upset your whole tribuneship, what more do you ask?
do you want some still more evident argument drawn from the rights of the people and the laws?
It was perhaps about the sixth hour when I complained in the court of justice (when I was defending Caius Antonius, my colleague,) of some things in the republic which appeared to me to relate to the cause of that unhappy man.
What I said was reported by some wicked men to some very eminent citizens in language very different from that which I had employed.
At the ninth hour on that very same day you were adopted.
If, while in all other laws there ought to be an interval of three days, it is sufficient in a law respecting an adoption that there should be one of three hours, I have nothing to object to.
But if the same forms are to be observed, if the senate decreed that the people was not bound by the laws of Marcus Drusus, which had been passed contrary to the provisions of the Caecilian and Didian laws
you must see that by every description of right which prevails with regard to sacred things, to the auspices, or to the laws, you were not elected tribune of the people.
And it is not without reason that I say no more on this point,
for I see that some most eminent men, the chief men of the city, have given their decision on different occasions, that you could legally proceed with matters which came before the common people;
who said too, with reference to my own case, though they said that the republic was murdered and buried by your motion, still that that burial, miserable and bitter as it was, was all according to law:
they said that in carrying such a motion as you had carried concerning me a citizen, and one who had deserved well of the republic, you had inflicted a deadly wound on the republic; but, inasmuch as you had carried it with all due reverence for the auspices, they said that you had acted legally.
Wherefore we, I imagine, may be allowed to abstain from attacking those actions by which they were induced to approve of the establishment of your tribuneship.
Suppose, however, that you were as rightly and legally tribune as Rullus himself, who is here present, a man most illustrious and honourable on every account; still, by what law, or in accordance with what precedent or what custom, did you pass a law affecting, by name, the civil rights of a citizen who had not been condemned?
The sacred laws, the laws of the Twelve Tables, forbid bills to be brought in affecting individuals only; for such a bill is a privilegium.
No one has ever carried such a bill.
There is nothing more cruel, nothing more mischievous, nothing which this city can less tolerate.
What was it in that miserable proscription, and all the other miseries of Sulla's time, which was the most remarkable thing which will prevent the cruelties then practised from being ever forgotten?
I imagine it was the fact that punishments were at that time proclaimed on Roman citizens by name without any trial.
Will you, then, O priests, by this decision, and by your authority, give a tribune of the people power to proscribe whomsoever he chooses?
For I ask what else proscribing is, excepting proposing such a law as this, "That you will decide and order that Marcus Tullius shall no longer be in the city, and that his property may become mine?"
For this is the effect of what he carried, though the language is somewhat different.
Is this a resolution of the people?
Is this a law? Is this a motion?
Can you endure this?
Can the city endure that a single citizen should be removed out of the city by a single line?
I, indeed, have now endured my share.
I have no more violence to fear.
I am in dread of no further attacks.
I have satisfied the hostility of those who envied me;
I have appeased the hatred of wicked men; I have satiated even the treachery and wickedness of traitors;
and, what is more, by this time every city, all ranks of men, all gods and men have expressed their opinion on my case, which appeared to those profligate men to be exposed above all others as a mark for unpopularity.
You now, O priests, are bound; as becomes your authority and your wisdom, to have regard in your decision to your own interests, and to those of your children, and to the welfare of the rest of the citizens.
For as the forms of proceeding before the people have been appointed by our ancestors to be so moderate, so that in the first place no punishment affecting a man's status as a citizen can be joined to any pecuniary fine
in the next place, that no one can be accused except on a day previously appointed;
again, that the prosecutor must accuse him before the magistrate three times, a day being allowed to intervene between each hearing, before the magistrate can inflict any fine or give any decision; and when there is a fourth hearing for the accusation appointed after seventeen days, on a day appointed on which the judge shall give his decision; and when many other concessions have been granted to the defendants to give them an opportunity of appeasing the prosecutor, or of exciting pity;
and besides this the people is a people inclined to listen to entreaties, and very apt to give their votes for a defendant's safety; and, beyond all this, if anything prevents the cause from being proceeded with on that day, either because of the auspices, or on any other plea or excuse, then there is an end to the whole cause and to the whole business.
As these things then are so where is the accusation, where is the prosecutor? where are the witnesses?
What is more scandalous, than when a man has neither been ordered to appear, nor summoned, nor accused, for hired men, assassins, needy and profligate citizens, to give a vote touching his status as a citizen, his children and all his fortune, and then to think that vote a law?
But, if he was able to do this in my case, I being a man protected by the honours which I had attained, by the justice of my cause, and by the republic; and being not so rich as to make my money an object to my enemies, and he had nothing which could be injurious to me, except the great chances which were taking place in the affairs of the state, and the critical condition of the times;
what is likely to happen to those men whose way of life is removed from popular honours and from all that renown which gives influence, and whose riches are so great that too many men, needy, extravagant, and even of noble birth, covet them?
Grant this licence to a tribune of the people, and then for a moment contemplate in your minds the youth of the city, and especially those men who seem now to be anxiously coveting the tribunitian power.
There will be found, by Jove! whole colleges of tribunes of the people, if this law is once established, and they will all conspire against the property of all the richest men, when a booty so especially popular and the hope of great acquisitions is thus held out to them.
But what vote is it that this skillful and experienced law-giver has carried?
May you be willing and may you command that Marcus Tullius be interdicted from water and fire.
A cruel vote, a nefarious vote, one not to be endured even in the case of the very wickedest citizen, without a trial.
He did not propose a vote, "That he be interdicted."
What then?
That he has been interdicted.
O horrible, O prodigious, O what wickedness!
Did Clodius frame this law, more infamous than even his own tongue? that it has been interdicted to a person to whom it has not been interdicted?
My good friend Sextus, by your leave, tell me now, since you are a logician and are devoted to this science, is it possible for a proposition to be made to the people, or to be established by any form of words, or to be confirmed by any votes, making that to have been done which has not been done?
And have you ruined the public, with the man who drew this law for your adviser, and counselor, and minister, a fellow more impure, not only than any biped, but even than any quadruped?
And you were not so foolish or so mad as to be ignorant that this man who violated the laws was Clodius; but that there were other men who were accustomed to frame laws: but you had not the least power over any one of them, or over any one else who had any character to lose;
nor could you employ the same framers of laws, or the same architect for your works, as the others; nor could you obtain the aid of any priest you chose.
Lastly, you were not able to discover, not even when you were dividing your plunder, any purchaser, or any one to share your plunder with you, out of your own band of gladiators, nor any one to support that proscription of yours with his vote except some thief or assassin.
Therefore, when you, flourishing and powerful, were triumphing in the middle of your mob, those friends of yours, safe and happy in having you for their only friend, who had entrusted their fate to the people, were repelled in such a way that they lost the support of even that Palatine tribe of yours.
They who came before a court of justice, whether as prosecutors or as defendants, were condemned, though you endeavoured to beg them off.
Lastly, even that new recruit, Ligur, your venal backer and seconder, when he had been disgraced by being passed over in the will of Marcus Papirius his brother, who expressed his opinion of him by that action, said that he desired to have a legal investigation into the circumstances of his death, and accused Sextus Propertius as accessory to it.
He did not venture to accuse his partners of a crime in which they had no concern, and to endeavour to procure their condemnation, lest he himself should have been convicted of bringing false accusations.
We are speaking, then, of this law which appears to have been legally brought forward, while yet every one that has had anything to do with any part of it, either by hand, voice, vote, or by sharing in the plunder, wherever he has been, has come off rejected and convicted.
What shall we say if the proscription is framed in such terms that it repels itself?
For it is, "Because Marcus Tullius has forged a decree of the senate."
If, then, he did forge a decree of the senate, the law was proposed; but if he did not forge one, no proposition has been made at all.
Does it or does it not appear sufficiently decided by the senate that I did not falsely allege the authority of that order, but that I, of all the men that have ever lived since the foundation of the city, have been the most diligent in my obedience to the senate?
In how many ways do I not prove that that which you call a law is no law at all?
What shall we say if you brought many different matters before the people at one and the same time?
Do you still think that what Marcus Drusus, that admirable man, could not obtain in most of his laws, that what Marcus Scaurus and Lucius Crassus, men of consular rank, could not obtain, you can obtain through the agency of the Decurii and Clodii, the ministers of all your debaucheries and crimes?
You carried a proposition respecting me, that I should not be received anywhere, not that I should depart, when you yourself were not able to say that it was unlawful for me to remain in Rome.
For what could you say? That I had been condemned?, Certainly not. That I had been expelled.
How could you say that?
And yet even that was not stated in your bill that I was to depart; there is a penalty for any one who received me, which every one disregarded; but there is no mention anywhere of driving me out.
However, suppose there were, what are we to say about the collecting of all the common artisans to pull down my house?
what shall we say about your having your name cut on it? does that seem to you to be anything except a plundering of all my property?
except that you could not by the Licinian law undertake the commission yourself.
What are we to say about this very matter which you are now arguing before the priests; namely, that you consecrated my house, that you erected a memorial, that you dedicated a statue in my house, and that you did all these things by one little bit of a bill?
Do all these things appear to be only one and the same business with the bill which you carried against me expressly by name?
It is just the same thing that you did when you also carried these different enactments in one law, one, that the king of Cyprus, whose ancestors had always been allies and friends to this nation, should have all his goods sold by the public crier, and the other, that the exiles should be brought back to Byzantium.
Oh, says he, "I employed the same person on both those matters."
What?
Suppose you had given the same man a commission to get you an Asiatic coin in Asia, and from thence to proceed into Spain; and given him leave, after he had departed from Rome, to stand for the consulship, and, after he was made consul, to obtain Syria for his province; would that be all one measure, because you were mentioning only one man?
And if now the Roman people had been consulted about that business, and if you had not done everything by the instrumentality of slaves and robbers, was it impossible for the Roman people to approve of the part of the measure relating to the king of Cyprus, and to approve of that part which affected Byzantine exiles?
What other force, what other meaning, I should like to know, has the Caecilian and Didian law, except this; that the people are not to be forced in consequence of many different things being joined in one complicated bill, either to accept what it disapproves of; or reject what it approves?
What shall we say if you carried the bill by violence?
is it, nevertheless, a law?
Or can anything appear to have been done rightfully which was notoriously done by violence?
And if, at the very time of your getting this law passed, when the city was stormed, stones were not thrown, and men did not actually come to blows hand to hand, is that any proof that you were able to contrive that disgrace and ruin to the city without extreme violence?
When in the Aurelian tribunal you were openly enrolling not only freemen but slaves also, got together out of all the streets in the city, were you not at that time preparing for violence?
When by your edicts, you ordered all the shops to be shut, were you aiming not at the violence of the mob, but at a modest and prudent gathering of honourable men?
When you were having arms collected and carried to the temple of Castor, had you no other object beyond preventing others from being able to effect anything by violence?
But when you tore up and removed the steps of the temple of Castor, did you then, in order to be able to act in a moderate manner, repel audacious men from the approaches and ascents leading to the temple?
When you ordered those persons who, in an assembly of virtuous men, had spoken in defence of, my safety, to come forward, and had driven away their companions and seconders by blows and arms and stones; then, no doubt, you showed that violence was excessively disagreeable to you.
Oh, but this frantic violence of a demented tribune of the people could easily be crushed and put down by the virtue and superior numbers of the good citizens.
What?
when Syria was given to Gabinius, Macedonia to Piso, boundless authority and vast sums of money to both of them, to induce them to place everything in your power, to assist you, to supply you which followers, and troops, and their own prepared centurions, and money, and bands of slaves; to all you with their infamous assemblies, to deride the authority of the senate, to threaten the Roman knights with death and proscription, to terrify me with threats, to threaten me with contests and murder, to fill my house with their friends, which had heretofore been full of virtuous men; through fear of proscription; to deprive me of the crowds of good men who used to associate with me, to strip me of their protection; to forbid the senate, that most illustrious body, not only to fight for me, but even to implore men, and to entreat them in my behalf, and, changing their garments, to lament my danger, was not even this violence?
Why then did I depart, or what fear was there?
I will not say in me.
Allow that I am timid by nature; what are we to say of so many thousands of the bravest men?
what did our Roman knights think? what did the senate? what, in short, did all good men think?
If there was no violence, why did they escort me out of the city with tears, instead of reproving and detaining me, or being indignant with me and leaving me?
Or was I afraid that I could not, while present, resist their accusations if they proceeded against me according to the usages and principles of our ancestors?
If a day had been appointed for my trial, must I have dreaded the investigation?
or must I have feared a private bill being introduced against me without any trial?
A trial in so shameful a cause I suppose I am a man who, if the cause were not understood, could not speak so as to explain it at all,
or could I not make people approve of my cause, when its excellence is such that of its own merits it made people approve not only of itself while it was before them, but of me also though I was absent?
Was the senate, were all ranks of the people, were those men who flew hither from all Italy to cooperate in my recall, likely to be more indifferent, while I was present, about retaining and preserving me, in that cause which even that parricide says was such, that he complains that I was sought out and recalled to my previous honours by the whole people?
Was there then no danger to me whatever in a court of justice; but was I to fear a private bill, and that if a penalty were sought to be recovered from me while I was present, no one would interpose a veto?
Was I so destitute of friends, or was the republic so entirely without magistrates?
What?
supposing the tribes had been convoked, would they have approved of a proscription, I will not say against me who had deserved so well of them by my efforts for their safety, but would they have approved of it in the case of any citizen whatever?
Or, if I had been present, would those veteran troops of conspirators, and those profligate and needy soldiers of yours, and that new force of two most impious consuls, have spared my person,
when, after that I had, by departing, succumbed to their inhumanity and wickedness, I could not though absent satisfy their hostility to me by my misfortunes?
For what injury had my unhappy wife done to you? whom you harassed and plundered and ill-treated with every description of cruelty.
What harm had my daughter done to you? whose incessant weeping and mourning and misery were so agreeable to you, though they moved the eyes and feelings of every one else.
What had my little son done? whom no one ever saw all the time that I was away, that he was not weeping and lamenting; what, I say, had he done that you should so often try to murder him by stratagem?
What had my brother done? who, when, some time after my departure, he arrived from his province and thought that it was not worth his while to live unless I were restored to him, when his chief and excessive and unprecedented mourning seemed to render him an object of pity to every one, was constantly attacked by you with arms and violence, he escaped with difficulty out of your hands.
But why need I dilate upon your cruelty which you have displayed towards me and mine?
when you have waged a horrible and nefarious war, dyed with every description of hatred against my walls, my roofs, my pillars and door-posts.
For I do not think that you, when, after my departure, you in the covetousness of your hopes had devoured the fortunes of all the rich men, the produce of all the provinces, the property of tetrarchs and of kings, were blinded by the desire of my plate and furniture.
I do not think that that Campanian consul with his dancing colleague, after you had sacrificed to the one all Achaia, Thessaly, Boeotia, Greece, Macedonia and all the countries of the barbarians, and the property of the Roman citizens in those countries, and when you had delivered up to the other Sulla, Babylon, and the Persians those hitherto uninjured and peaceful nations, to plunder, I do not think, I say, that they were covetous of my thresholds and pillars and folding doors.
Nor, indeed, did the bands and forces of Catiline think that they could appease their hunger with the tiles and mortar of my roofs.
But as, without being influenced by the idea of booty, still out of hatred we are accustomed to destroy the cities of enemies; not of all enemies indeed, but of those with whom we have waged any bitter and intestine war; because when our minds have been inflamed against any people by reason of their cruelty, there always appears to be some war still lingering in their abodes and habitations,
No law had been passed respecting me.
I had not been ordered to appear in court; I had not been summoned.
I was even in your own opinion a citizen with all my rights as such unimpaired, when my house on the Palatine hill, and my villa in the district of Tusculum, were transferred one a-piece to each of the consuls; decrees of the senate were flying about;
marble columns from my house were carried off to the father-in-law of the consul in the sight of the Roman people; and the consul who was my neighbour at my villa had not only my stock and the decorations of my villa, but even my trees transferred to his farm; while the villa itself was utterly destroyed, not from a desire of plunder, (for what plunder could there be there?) but out of hatred and cruelty.
My house on the Palatine hill was burnt, not by accident, but having been set on fire on purpose.
The consuls were feasting and reveling amid the congratulations of the conspirators, while the one boasted that he had been the favourite of Catiline, and the other that he was the cousin of Cethegus.
This violence, O priests, this wickedness, this frenzy, I, opposing my single person to the storm, warded off from the necks of all good men, and I received on my body all the attacks of disaffection, all the long-collected violence of the wicked, which, having been long coming to a head, with silent and repressed hatred, was at last breaking out now that it had got such audacious leaders.
Against me alone were directed the consular firebrands hurled from the hands of the tribunes; all the impious arrows of the conspiracy, which I had once before blunted, now stuck in me.
But if, as was the advice of many most gallant men, I had determined to contend with violence and arms against violence, I should either have gained the day with a great slaughter of wicked men, who notwithstanding were citizens, or else all the good men would have been slain, to the great joy of the wicked, and I too should have perished together with the republic.
I saw, that if the senate and people of Rome existed, I should have a speedy return with the greatest dignity, and I did not think it possible that such a state of affairs should longer continue to exist, as for me not to be allowed to live in that republic which I myself had saved.
And if I were not allowed to live there, I had heard and read that some of the most illustrious men of our country had rushed into the middle of the enemy to manifest death for the sake of the safety of their army.
And could I doubt that if I were to sacrifice myself for the safety of the entire republic, I should in this point be better off than the Decii, because they could not even hear of their glory, while I should be able to be even a spectator of my own renown?
Therefore your frenzy, being disconcerted, kept making vain attacks.
For the bitterness of my fortune had exhausted all the violence of all the wicked citizens.
In such terrible disaster and such wide-spread ruin, there was no room for any new cruelty.
Cato was next to me.
Was there nothing which you could do beyond making him who had been my leader and guide in all my conduct a partner also in my misfortune?
Could you banish him? You could send him away for the money of Cyprus.
One booty may have been lost; another will be sure to be found; only let this man be got out of the way.
Accordingly, the hated Marcus Cato is commissioned to go to Cyprus, as if it was a kindness that was being conferred on him.
Two men are removed, whom the wicked men could not bear the sight of; one by the most discreditable sort of honour, the other by the most honourable possible calamity.
And that you may be aware that that man had been an enemy not to their persons, but to their virtues, after I was driven out, and Cato despatched on his commission, he turns himself against that very man by whose advice and by whose assistance he was in the habit of saying in the assemblies that he had done and continued to do what he was then doing and everything which he had hitherto done.
He thought that Cnaeus Pompeius, who he saw was in every one's opinion by far the first man in the city, would not much longer tolerate his frenzy.
After he had filched out of his custody by treachery the son of a king who was our friend, himself being an enemy and a prisoner, and having provoked that most gallant man by this injury, he thought that he could contend with him by the aid of those troops against whom I had been willing to struggle at the risk of the destruction of all virtuous citizens, especially as at first he had the consuls to help him.
But after a time Gabinius broke his agreement with him; but Piso continued faithful to him.
You saw what massacres that man then committed, what men he stoned, what numbers he made to flee; how easily by means of his armed bands and his daily plots did he compel Cnaeus Pompeius to absent himself from the forum and the senate-house, and to confine himself to his own house, even after he had been already deserted by the best part of his forces.
And from this you may judge how great that violence was at its first rise, and when first collected together, when even after it was scattered and almost extinct it alarmed Cnaeus Pompeius in this way.
That most prudent man, Lucius Cotta, a man most deeply attached to the republic and to me, and above all to truth, saw this when he delivered his opinion on the first of January.
He then considered it unnecessary that any law should be passed for my return.
He said that I had consulted the interests of the republic; that I had yielded to the tempest; that I had been more friendly to you and to the rest of the citizens than to myself and to my own relations; that I had been driven away by the disturbances of a body of men banded together for purposes of bloodshed, and by an unprecedented exercise of power; that no law could possibly have been passed affecting my status as a citizen; that no law had been drawn up in writing, that none could have any validity; that everything had been done in disregard of the laws and of the usages of our ancestors, in a rash and turbulent manner, by violence and frenzy.
But if that were a law, then it was not lawful for the consuls to refer the matter to the senate, nor for him himself to express his opinion upon it in the senate.
And as both these things were being done, it was not right that it should be decreed that a law should be passed concerning me, lest that which was no law at all, should be in consequence decided to be a law.
No opinion could be truer, sounder, more expedient, or better for the republic.
For the wickedness and frenzy of the man being stigmatized by it, all danger of similar disgrace to the republic for the future was removed.
Nor did Cnaeus Pompeius, who delivered a most elaborate opinion and most honourable to me, nor did you, O priests, who defended me by your decision and authority, fail to see that that was no law at all, and that it was rather the heat of the times, an interdict of wickedness, a voice of frenzy.
But you were anxious to guard against any popular odium being excited against you; if we appeared to have been restored without any decision of the people.
And with the same idea the senate adopted the opinion of Marcus Bibulus, a most fearless man, that you should decide the question relating to my house:
not that he doubted that nothing had been done by Clodius with due regard either to the laws, or to the requirements of religion, or to the rights of the citizens; but that, as wicked men were so numerous, no one should at any time arise and say that there was anything holy about my house.
For as often as the senate has expressed any opinion at all in my case, so often has it decided that that was no law at all, since indeed, according to that writing which that fellow drew up, it was forbidden to express any opinion at all.
And that kindred pair, Piso and Gabinius, saw this.
Those men, so obedient to the laws and courts of justice, when the senate in very full houses kept constantly entreating them to make a motion respecting me, said that they did not disapprove of the object, but that they were hindered by that fellow's law.
And this was true; but it was law which he had passed about giving them Macedonia and Syria.
But you, O Publius Lentulus, neither as a private individual nor as consul ever thought that it was a law.
For when the tribunes of the people made a motion, you as consul elect often delivered your opinion concerning my affairs; and from the first of January to the time that the whole affair was completed, you persevered in making motions respecting me, you proposed a law, you passed it; none of which things could legally have been done by you if that thing of Clodius's had been a law.
But Quintus Metellus your colleague, a most illustrious man, even though he was a brother of Clodius, when he joined you in making a motion in the senate respecting my affairs, expressed his opinion that that was no law at all which men utterly unconnected with Clodius, namely Piso and Gabinius, considered was a law.
But how did those men who had such respect for Clodius's laws observe the rest of the laws?
The senate indeed, whose authority is of the very greatest weight on all questions affecting the power of the laws, as often as it has been consulted in my case, has decided that that was no law at all.
And you, O Lentulus, showed that you were aware of its not being one in that law which you carried concerning me.
For that law was not framed in such terms as that I might be allowed to come to Rome, but that I should come to Rome.
For you did not wish to propose to make that lawful for me to do, which was lawful already; but you wished me to be in the republic, appearing to have been sent for by the command of the Roman people, rather than to have been restored for the purpose of aiding in the management of the republic.
Did you then, O you most monstrous pest, dare to call that man an exile, when you yourself were branded with such wickedness and such crimes that you made every place which you approached very like a place of banishment?
For what is an exile?
The name itself is an indication of misfortune, not of disgrace.
When, then, is it disgraceful?
In reality when it is the punishment of guilt; but in the opinion of men, when it is the punishment of a condemned person.
Is it then owing to any crime of mine that I hear the name of an exile, or owing to any judicial sentence? Owing to any crime?
Even you, whom those satellites of yours call the prosperous Catiline, do not dare to affirm that, nor do any one of those men who used to say so, venture to say so now.
There is not only no one so ignorant now as to say that those actions which I did in my consulship were errors; but no one is such an enemy to his country as not to confess that the country was preserved by my counsels.
For what deliberative assembly is there in the whole earth, whether great or little, which has not expressed that opinion of my exploits which is most desirable and most honourable for me?
The greatest council of the Roman people, and of all peoples, and nations, and kings, is the senate.
That decreed that all men who desired the safety of the republic should come forward to defend me alone, and showed its opinion that the republic could not have been saved if I had not existed, and could not last if I did not return.
The next in rank to this dignified body is the equestrian order.
All the companies of public contractors passed most favourable and honourable decrees respecting my consulship and my actions.
The scriveners, who are much connected with us in matters relating to public registers and monuments, took good care that their sentiments and resolutions respecting my services to the republic should not be left in doubt.
There is no corporation in all this city, no body of men either from the higher or lower parts of the city, (since our ancestors thought fit that the common people of the city should also have places of meeting and some sort of deliberative assemblies,) which has not passed most honourable resolutions, not merely respecting my safety, but relating also to my dignity.
For why need I mention those divine and immortal decrees of the municipal towns, and of the colonies, and of all Italy, by which, as by a flight of steps, I seem not only to have returned to my country, but to have mounted up to heaven?
And what a day was that when the Roman people beheld you, O Publius Lentulus, passing a law respecting me, and felt how great a man and how worthy a citizen you were.
For it is well known that the Campus Martius had never on any comitia seen so vast a crowd, or such a splendid assembly of men of every class, age, and order.
I say nothing of the unanimous judgment and unanimous agreement of the cities, nations, provinces, kings, of the whole world, in short, as to the services which I had done to the whole human race.
But what an arrival at and entry into the city was mine!
Did my country receive me as it ought to receive light and safety when brought back and restored to it, or as a cruel tyrant, as you, you herd of Catiline, were accustomed to call me?
Therefore that one day on which the Roman people honoured me by escorting me with immense numbers and loud demonstrations of joy from the gate to the Capitol, and from the Capitol home, was so delightful to me, that that wicked violence of yours which had driven me away appeared not to be a thing from which I ought to have been defended, but one which it was worth my while even to purchase.
Wherefore that calamity, if it deserves to be called a calamity, has put an end to the whole previous system of abuse, and has prevented any one for the future from daring to find fault with my consulship, which has now been approved of by such numerous, and such important, and such dignified decisions, and testimonies, and authorities.
And if, in all that abuse of yours, you not only impute no disgraceful conduct to me, but even add more lustre on my credit, what can exist or be imagined more senseless than you?
For by one piece of abuse you admit that my country was twice saved by me; once when I performed that action which every one avows ought to be remembered for ever if it be possible, you thought that I ought to be punished and put to death; a second time, when I bore in my own person your own violence and that of the numbers who through your agency were inflamed against all virtuous men, in order to avoid taking arms, and in that condition bringing into danger that state which I had saved when without arms.
There was not in my case any punishment imposed for any offence.
Still there was punishment imposed on me by a judicial decision.
By what decision?
Who ever examined me as a defendant under any law whatever?
Who ever accused me?
Who ever prosecuted me?
Can then a man who is uncondemned be made to bear the punishment of a condemned man?
Is this the act of a tribune of the people? Is this the act of a friend of the people?
Although, when is it that a man can call himself a friend of the people, except when he has done something for the advantage of the people?
Forsooth, has not this principle been handed down to us from our ancestors, that no Roman citizen can be deprived of his liberty, or of his status as a citizen, unless he himself consents to such a thing, as you yourself might learn in your own case?
For, although in that adoption of yours nothing was done in a legal manner, still I suppose that you were asked, whether it was your object that Publius Fonteius should have the same power of life and death over you that be would have over an actual son.
I ask, if you had either silenced it or had been silent, if, nevertheless, the thirty curies had passed a vote to this effect would that vote have had the force off law?
Certainly not.
Why?
Because the law was established by our ancestors, who were not fictitiously and pretendedly attached to the people, but were so in truth and wisdom, in such a manner that no Roman citizen could be deprived of his liberty against his consent.
Moreover, if the decemvirs had given an unjust decision to the prejudice of any one's liberty, they established a law that any one who chose might on this subject alone, make a motion affecting a formal decision already pronounced.
But no one will ever lose his status as a citizen against his will by any vote of the people.
The Roman citizens who left Rome and went to the Latin colonies could not be made Latins, unless they themselves promoted such a change, and gave in their names themselves.
Those men who had been condemned on a capital charge, did not lose their rights as citizens of this city before they were received as citizens of that other city to which they had gone for the sake of changing their abode.
Our ancestors took care that they should do so, not by taking away their rights of citizenship, but only their house, and by interdicting them from fire and water within the city.
The Roman people on the motion of Lucius Sulla, the dictator, in the comitia centuriata, took away the rights of citizenship from the municipal towns, and at the same time took away their lands.
The decree about the lands was ratified, for that the people had power to pass; but their decree concerning the rights of citizenship did not last even as long as the disturbances of the time of Sulla.
Shall we then say that Lucius Sulla, victorious as he was, after he had been restored to the republic, could not in the comitia centuriata take away the rights of citizenship from the people of Volaterra, even though they were in arms at the time;
and the Volaterrans to this day enjoy the rights of citizenship in common with ourselves, being not only citizens, but most excellent citizens too; and allow that Publius Clodius, at a time when the republic was utterly overturned, could take away his rights as a citizen from a man of consular rank, by summoning an assembly, and hiring bands not only of needy citizens, but even of slaves, with Sedulius as their imputed leader, though he declares that on that day he was not in Rome at all?
And, if he was not, what could be a more audacious thing than your putting his name to that bill?
What could be more desperate than your condition, when, even if you told a lie about it you could not get up any more respectable authority?
But if he was the first person who voted for it as he easily might have been, as he was a man who, for want of a house, slept all night in the forum, why should he not swear that he was at Cadiz, when you have proved so very distinctly that you were at Interamna?
Do you, then, you, a man devoted to the people, think that our rights as citizens, and our freedom, ought to he established on this principle; so that when a tribune of the people brings forward a motion, "Do you approve and determine" if a hundred Sedulii should say that they do approve and determine, any one of us may lose our privileges?
Our ancestors, then, were not attached to the interests of the people, who with respect to the rights of citizenship and liberty established those principles which neither the power of time, nor the authority of magistrates, nor the decisions of judges, nor the sovereign power of the whole people of Rome, which in all other affairs is most absolute, can undermine.
But you, also, you who take men's rights as citizens from them, have also passed a law with respect to public injuries in favour of some fellow of Anagnia, of the name of Maerula, and he on account of that law has erected a statue to you in my house; so that the place itself, in hearing witness to your prodigious injustice, might refute the law and inscription on your statue.
And that law was a much greater cause of grief to the citizens of Anagnia than the crimes which that gladiator had committed in that municipal town.
What shall I say, if there is nothing said about the rights of citizenship even in that very form of motion which Sedulius declares he never voted for?
Do you still cling to his authority in order to throw a lustre on the exploits of your splendid tribuneship by the dignity of that man?
But although you passed no law respecting me, to prevent my continuing not only in the number of Roman citizens, but even in that rank in which the honours conferred on me by the Roman people had placed me;
will you still raise your voice to attack him whom after the abominable wickedness of the preceding consuls you see honoured by the decisions of the senate, of the Roman people, and of all Italy? whom even at the time when I was departing you could not deny, even by your own law, to be a senator.
For, where was it that you passed the law that I should be interdicted from fire and water?
When Gracchus passed such a decree respecting Publius Popillius, and Saturninus respecting Metellus, and other most seditious men respecting other most virtuous and gallant citizens, they did not pass a decree that they had been interdicted, which could have been quite intolerable but that they should be interdicted.
When did you insert a clause that the censor should not enter me on the rolls of the senate in my proper place?
which is a clause in the law concerning every one who has been condemned when the interdict is being framed.
Ask this of Sextus Clodius the framer of your laws. Bid him come forward;
he is keeping out of the way; but if you order him to be looked for they will find the man in your sister's house hiding himself with his head down.
But if no one in his senses ever called your father a citizen yes, by Jove, a good citizen, and one very unlike you, if no one I say, ever called him an exile, who, when a tribune of the people had proposed a bill against him, would not appear on account of the iniquity of that period of Cinna's triumph, and who, on that account had his command taken from him; if, I say, in his case, a punishment inflicted by law carried no disgrace with it, on account of the violent character of those times, could there, in my ease, be any penalty against me as if I had been condemned when I never was tried when I never was accused when I never was summoned by any tribune of the people, and, especially, a penalty which was not mentioned not even in the proposed bill itself?
But just remark what the difference is between that most iniquitous misfortune inflicted on your father and between my fortune and condition
I am now discussing Lucius Philippus the censor, in reading the roll of the senate, passed over his own uncle, your father, a most excellent citizen; the son of a most illustrious man, himself a man of such severity of character that if he were alive you would not have been suffered to live.
For he had no reason to allege why those acts should not be ratified which had been done in that republic in which, at that very time, he had been willing to take upon himself the office of censor.
But as for me, Lucius Cotta, a man of censorian rank, said in the senate, on his oath, that if he had been censor at the time that I left the city, he should have retained me on the list as a senator in my proper place.
Who appointed any judge in my place?
who of my friends made a will at the time that I was absent, and did not give me the same that he would have given me if I had been in the city?
who was there, I will not say only among the citizens, but even among the allies, who hesitated to receive and assist me in defiance of your law?
Lastly, the whole senate, long before the law was passed respecting me, "Voted, that thanks should be given to all those cities by which Marcus Tullius..."
No it went, "a citizen who had done the greatest services to the republic, had been received:"
and do you, one single pernicious citizen, deny that that citizen has been legally restored, whom the whole senate, even while he was absent, considered not only a citizen, but has at all times considered a most illustrious one?
But as the annals of the Roman people and the records of antiquity relate, that great man Caeso Quintius, and Marcus Furius Camillus, and Marcus Servilius Ahala, though they had deserved exceedingly well of the republic, still had to endure the violence and passion of an excited people; and after they had been condemned by the comitia centuriata and had gone into banishment, were again restored to their former dignity by the same people in a more placable humour.
But if, in the case of those men who were thus condemned, their calamity not only did not diminish the glory of their most illustrious names, but even added fresh lustre to it; (for, although it is more desirable to finish the course of one's life without pain and without injury, still it contributes more to the immortality of a man's glory to have been universally regretted by his fellow-citizens: than never to have been injured;) shall a similar misfortune have in my case the force of a reproach or of an accusation, when I left the city without any sentence of the people, and have been restored by most honourable resolutions of every order of society?
Publius Popillius was always a brave and wise citizen in every point of view; yet in the whole of his life there is nothing which sheds a greater lustre on his character than this very calamity.
For who would have recollected now that he conferred great benefits on the republic, if he had not been expelled by the wicked and restored by the good?
The conduct of Quintus Metellus as a military commander was admirable, his censorship was splendid, his whole life was full of wisdom and dignity; and yet it is his calamity which has handed down his praises to everlasting recollection.
But if the injury inflicted on them by their enemies was not any disgrace to those men who were expelled unjustly, but still who were restored according to law, after their enemies had been slain, after the tribunes had brought forward motions respecting them; not by the authority of the senate, not by the comitia centuriata, not by the decrees of all Italy, not by the universal regret of the state;
do you think that in my case, who departed uncondemned, who departed at the same time as the republic, and returned with the greatest dignity, while you were still alive, while one of your brothers was one of the consuls who brought me back, and the other was the praetor who demanded my recall, your wickedness ought to be any discredit to me?
And if the Roman people, being inflamed with passion or envy, had driven me out of the city, and afterwards, remembering my services to the republic, had recollected itself; and shown its repentance for its rashness and injustice by restoring me; yet, in truth, no one would have been so senseless, as to think that such conduct on the part of the people ought not rather to be considered an honour to me than a disgrace.
But now, when of all the people no one has accused me, when it is impossible for me to have been condemned, seeing that I have never been accused, since I was not even expelled in such a way that I could not have got the better of my adversaries if I had contested the point with them by force; and when, on the other hand, I have at all times been defrauded and praised and honoured by the Roman people; what pretence has any one for thinking himself better off than I am, at all events as far as the people are concerned?
Do you think that the Roman people consists of these men who can be hired for any purpose? who are easily instigated to offer violence to magistrates? to besiege the senate? to wish every day for bloodshed, conflagration and plunder?
people, indeed, whom you could not possibly collect together unless you shut up all the taverns; a people to whom you gave the Lentidii, and Lollii, and Plaguleii, and Sergii, for leaders.
Oh for the splendour and dignity of the Roman people, for kings, for foreign nations, for the most distant lands to fear; a multitude collected of slaves, of hirelings, of, criminals, and beggars!
That was the real beauty and splendour of the Roman people, which you beheld in the Campus Martius at that time, when even you were allowed to speak in opposition to the authority and wishes of the senate and of all Italy.
That is the people that, I say, is the people which is the lord of kings, the conqueror and commander-in-chief of all nations, which you, O wicked man, beheld in that most illustrious day when all the chief men of the city, when all men of all ranks and ages considered themselves as giving their votes, not about the safety of a citizen, but about that of the state; when men arrive into the Campus, the municipal towns having been all emptied, not the taverns.
By the aid of this people, if there had then been real consuls in the republic, or if there had been no consuls at all, I should without any difficulty have resisted your headlong frenzy and impious wickedness.
But I was unwilling to take up the public cause against armed violence, without the protection of the people.
Not that I disapproved of the late rigour of Publius Scipio, that bravest of men, when he was only a private individual; but Publius Mucius the consul, who was considered somewhat remiss in defending the republic, immediately defended, and, more than that, extolled the action of Scipio in many resolutions passed by the senate.
But, in my case, I, if you were slain, would have had to contend by force of arms against the consuls, or if you were alive, against both you and them together.
There were many other circumstances also to be feared at that time.
The contest, would, in truth, have reached the slaves.
So great a hatred of all good men had still got possession of the minds of impious citizens, being burnt as it were into their wicked minds by that ancient conspiracy.
Here, too, you warn me not to boast.
You say that those things are intolerable which I am accustomed to assert concerning myself; and being a witty man, you put on quite a polite and elegant sort of language.
You say that I am accustomed to say that I am Jupiter; and also to make a frequent boast that Minerva is my sister.
I will not so much defend myself from the charge of insolence in calling myself Jupiter, as from that of ignorance in thinking Minerva the sister of Jupiter.
But even if I do say so, I at all events claim a virgin for my sister; but you would not allow your sister to remain a virgin.
Consider rather whether you have not a right to call yourself Jupiter, because you have established a right to call the same woman both sister and wife.
And since you find fault with me for this, that you assert that I am accustomed to speak too boastfully of myself; I ask, who ever heard me speak in this way, or speak of myself at all, except when I was compelled, and was doing so of necessity?
For if, when robberies, and bribery, and lust are imputed to me, I am accustomed to reply that the country was saved by my prudence, and labour, and personal danger, I ought not to be considered as boasting of my own exploits, so much as refusing to confess what is imputed to me.
But if, before these most miserable periods of the republic, nothing else was ever imputed to me, except the cruelty of my conduct at that time when I warded off destruction from the republic, what will you say?
Ought I when accused in this manner, not to have replied at all, or to have replied in an abject tone?
But I have always thought it for the interest of even the republic itself, that I should uphold by my language the propriety and glory of that most noble exploit which I performed by the authority of the senate, with the consent of all virtuous men, for the safety of my country; especially when I am the only person in this republic who have been able to say on oath, in the hearing of the Roman people, that this city and this republic had been saved by my exertions.
That accusation of cruelty has long since been extinguished, because men see that I was regretted, and demanded and sent for back by the wishes of all the citizens, not as a cruel tyrant, but as a most merciful parent.
Another charge has risen up.
That departure of mine from the city is attacked, which accusation I cannot reply to without the greatest credit to myself.
For what, O priests, ought I to say?
That I lied from a consciousness of guilt?
But that which was imputed to me as a crime, not only was not a crime, but was the most glorious action ever performed since the birth of man.
That I feared the sentence of the people?
But not only was there no trial at any time before the people, but if there had been, I should have departed with redoubled glory.
That the protection of the good was wanting to me?
It is false.
That I was afraid of death?
That is an assertion disgraceful to those who make it.
I am therefore compelled to say that which I would not say if I were not compelled.
(For I have never said anything at all in the way of extolling myself for the sake of gaining praise, but only with a view to repel an accusation.) I say, therefore, and I say it with the loudest voice I can command, when the inflamed violence of all the profligate citizens and conspirators, a tribune of the people being the leader, the consuls being their instigators, the senate being beaten down, the Roman knights being terrified, the whole city being in suspense and anxiety, was making an attack, not so much on me as, through me, on all good men I say that I then saw that if I conquered, there would be but little of the republic left, and if I were conquered, none at all.
And when I had decided that this would be the case, I lamented indeed my separation from my unhappy wife, the desolate state of my most beloved children, the distress of my most affectionate and excellent brother, who was away, and the sudden ruin of a family which had seemed so thoroughly established; but still I preferred to all these considerations the safety of my fellow-citizens, and I preferred that the republic should rather fall, if fall it must through the departure of one man, than through the slaughter of every one.
I hoped (as indeed happened) that I, though overthrown, might be raised again by gallant men who were still alive; but I expected that if I perished, involving all virtuous men in my fall, I could not by any possibility be recovered.
I felt indeed, O priests, a great and incredible pain; I do not deny it; nor do I pretend to that wisdom which some expected of me, who said that I was too much dispirited and cast down.
Could I, when I was torn from such a number and variety of enjoyments, (which I pass over, because even now I cannot speak of them without tears,) deny that I was a human being, and repudiate the common feelings of our nature?
But in that case I should neither call that action of mine praise-worthy, nor should I say that any service had been done to the republic by me, if I had only given up, for the sake of the republic, those things which I could bear the loss of with calmness; and that firmness of the mind, resembling that hardness of body, which, even when it is burnt, does not feel it, I should consider insensibility rather than virtue.
To encounter voluntarily such great grief of mind, and by oneself to endure, while the city is standing, those things which, when a city is taken, befall the conquered citizens; to see oneself torn from the embrace of one's friends, one's houses destroyed, one's property plundered; above all for the sake of one's country, to lose one's country itself to be stripped of the most honourable favours of the Roman people, to be precipitated from the highest rank of dignity, to see one's enemies in their robes of office demanding to conduct one's funeral before one's death has been properly mourned; to undergo all these troubles for the sake of saving one's fellow-citizens, and this with such feelings that you are miserable while absent, not being as wise as those philosophers who care for nothing, but being as attached to one's relations and to oneself as the common feelings and rights of men require, that is illustrious and godlike glory.
For he who with a calm spirit for the sake of the republic abandons those things which he has never considered dear or delightful is not showing any remarkable good will towards the republic
but he who abandons those things for the sake of the republic from which he is not torn without the greatest agony, his country is dear to that man and he prefers her safety to his affection for his own relations.
Wherefore that fury may burst itself;
and it must hear me say these things since it has provoked me I have twice saved the republic both when as consul in the garb of peace I subdued armed enemies, and when as a private individual I yielded to the consuls in arms.
Of each piece of conduct I have reaped the greatest reward
I reaped the reward of my first achievement when I saw the senate and all virtuous men, in pursuance of a resolution of the senate, change their garments for the sake of my safety; and that of my subsequent conduct, when the senate, and the Roman people, and all men, whether in a public or a private capacity, decided that without my return the republic would not be safe.
But this return of mine, O priests, depends now on your decision.
For if you place me in my house, then I do plainly see and feel that I am restored, which is what all through my cause you have been always labouring to effect by your displays of zeal, by your counsels, and influence, and resolutions; but if, my house is not only not restored to me, but is even allowed to continue to furnish my enemy with a memorial of my distress, of his own wicked triumph, of the public calamity, who is there who will consider this a restoration, and not rather an eternal punishment?
Moreover, my house, O priests, is in the sight of the whole city; and if there remains in it that (I will not call it monument of the city, but that) tomb inscribed with the name of my enemy, I had better migrate to some other spot, rather than dwell in that city in which I am to see trophies erected as tokens of victory over me and over the republic.
Could I have such hardness of mind or such shamelessness of eye, as to be able in that city, the preserver of which the senate has so often unanimously decided that I am, to behold my house thrown down, not by my own private enemy, but by the common foe, and then again built up and placed in the sight of the whole city, that the weeping of the virtuous citizens might know no cessation? \
The house of Spurius Maelius, who aimed at the kingdom, was razed.
What else ensued? The Roman people by the very name of Aequimaelium, which they gave the place, decided that what had happened to Maelius was deserved; the punishment inflicted on his folly was approved.
The house of Spurius Cassius was destroyed for the same reason; and on the same spot was built the temple of Tellus.
The house of Marcus Vaccus was in Vaccus's meadows, which was confiscated and destroyed in order that his crime might be kept alive in people's recollection by the name of the place.
Marcus Manlius, when he had beaten back the attack of the Gauls from the Capitoline steep, was not content with the renown of his good deed; he was adjudged to have aimed at regal power, and on that account you see that his house was pulled down and the place covered with two groves.
That therefore which our ancestors considered the greatest penalty which could be inflicted on wicked and infamous citizens, am I to undergo and to endure, so as to appear to posterity not to have been the extinguisher of conspiracy and wickedness, but its author and leader?
And will the dignity of the Roman people, O priests, be able to support this stain of infamy and inconsistency, while the senate live, while you are the chief man of the public council, if the house of Marcus Tullius Cicero appears joined with the house of Fulvius Flaccus by the memory of a punishment publicly inflicted?
Marcus Flaccus because he had acted with Caius Gracchus in a manner opposed to the safety of the republic, was put to death by the sentence of the senate, and his house was destroyed and confiscated, and on the spot Quintus Catulus some time after erected a portico out of the spoils of the Cimbri.
But that firebrand and fury of his country, when, under those great generals Piso and Gabinius, he had taken the city, and occupied, and was in entire possession of it, destroyed the memorials of a most illustrious man who was dead, and united my house with the house of Marcus Flaccus, in order that he, after he had crushed the senate, might inflict on him whom the conscript fathers had pronounced to be the saviour of his country, the same punishment which the senate had inflicted on the destroyer of the constitution.
But will you allow this portico to stand on the Palatine Hill, and on the most beautiful spot in the whole city, erected as an everlasting token to keep alive the recollection of all nations and of all foes of the frenzy of the tribunes, of the wickedness of the consuls of the cruelty of the conspirators, of the calamity of the republic, and of my sufferings?
A portico which, out of the affection which you have and always have had for the republic, you ought to wish to pull down, not only by your votes, but, if it were necessary, even by your hands.
Unless, perchance, the religious consecration of it by that chastest of pontiffs deters any one.
O that action, which careless men laugh at, but which graver citizens cannot hear of without the greatest indignation;
has Publius Clodius, who removed religion even out of the house of the Pontifex Maximus, introduced it into mine?
Do you, you who are the ministers of the religious ceremonies and sacrifices, admit this man to be an originator and regulator of public religion?
O ye immortal gods! (for I wish you to hear these things), does Publius Clodius have the management of your sacred rites?
Does he feel a reverent awe of your divine power?
Is he a man who thinks that all human affairs are regulated by your providence?
Is he not mocking the authority of all those eminent men who are here present?
Is he not abusing your authority, O priests?
Can any expression of religion escape or fall from that mouth?
of religion, which with that same mouth you have most foully and shamefully violated, by accusing the senate of passing severe degrees about religion.
Behold, behold, O priests, this religious man, and if it seems good to you, (and it is only the duty of virtuous priests,) warn him that there are some fixed limits to religion that a man ought not to be too superstitious.
Why was it necessary for you, O fanatical man, with an old woman's superstition, to go to see a sacred ceremony which was being performed at another person's house?
And how was it that you were possessed with such weakness of mind as to think it not possible for the gods to be sufficiently propitiated, unless you intruded yourself into the religious ceremonies of women?
Whom of your ancestors did you ever hear of, of those men who were attentive to their private religious duties, and who presided over the public priesthoods, who were present when a sacrifice was being offered to the Bona Dea?
No one; not even that great man who became blind:
from which it may be easily seen that in this life men form many erroneous opinions; when he, who had not knowingly seen anything which it was impious to see, lost his eye-sight; but in the case of that fellow, who has polluted the ceremonies, not only by his presence, but also by his incestuous guilt and, adultery, all the punishment due to his eyes has fallen on the blindness of his mind.
Can you, O priests, avoid being influenced by the authority of this man, so chaste, so religious, so holy, so pious a man, when he says that he, with his own hands, pulled down the house of a most virtuous citizen, and with the same hands consecrated it to the gods?
What was that consecration of yours?
I had carried a bill, says he, "to make it lawful for me to act."
What?
had you not inserted this clause in it, that if there was anything contrary to what was right in the bill, it should be invalid?
Will you then, O priests, by your decision, establish the point that it is right that the home of every one of you, and your altars, and your hearths, and your household gods, should be at the mercy of the caprice of the tribunes?
that it is right for any one, not only to throw down the house of that man whom he may have chosen to attack with a body of excited men, and may have driven away by violence, which is an act of present insanity, like the effect of a sudden terror, but for him to bind that man and property for all future time by the everlasting obligation of religion?
I indeed, O priests, have always understood that in undertaking religious obligations the main thing is to interpret what the intention of the immortal gods appears to be.
Nor is piety towards the gods anything but an honourable opinion of their divine power and intentions, while you suppose that nothing is required by them which is unjust or dishonourable.
That disgrace to the city could not find one single man, not even when he had everything in his power, to whom he could adjudge, or deliver, or make a present of my house; though he himself was inflamed with a great desire for that spot and for the house, and though, on that account alone, that excellent man had brought in that exceedingly just bill of his to make himself master of my property, yet even in the height of his madness he did not dare to take possession of my house, with the desire of which he had been so excited.
Do you think that the immortal gods were willing to remove into the house of that man to whose labour and prudence it was owing that they still retained possession of their own temples, dismantled and ruined as it was by the nefarious robbery of a most worthless man?
There is not one citizen in this numerous people, out of that polluted and blood-thirsty band of Publius Clodius, who laid hands on a single article of my property, or who did not in that storm defend it as if it had been his own.
But they who caught the infection and polluted themselves with any partnership in the plunder, or in the purchase of anything, were not able to escape every sort of condemnation, whether public or private.
Of this property then, of which no one touched a single thing without being accounted in every one's opinion one of the wickedest of men, did the immortal gods covet my house?
Did that beautiful Liberty of yours turn out my household gods and the eternal divinities of my hearth, in order to be established there herself by you, as if in a conquered country?
What is there more holy, what is there more carefully fenced round with every description of religious respect, than the house of every individual citizen?
here are his altars, here are his hearths, here are his household gods: here all his sacred rites, all his religious ceremonies are preserved.
This is the asylum of every one, so holy a spot that it is impious to drag any one from it.
And on this account that man's madness is the more to be rejected by your ears who has not only attacked in a manner contrary to all religion those things which our ancestors intended to be safe and hallowed among us, as guarded by the sanction of religion, but has even made use of the name of religion to overturn them.
And what goddess is she whom you have established there?
She ought indeed to be the good goddess; since she has been consecrated by you.
She is Liberty, says he.
Have you then established her in my house whom you have driven out of the whole city?
Did you, after you had denied that your colleagues, men invested with the highest power, were free; after you had closed all access to the temple of Castor against every one; after you had ordered in the hearing of the Roman people, this most illustrious man, of a most noble family, who has received the greatest honours from the Roman people, a priest, and a man of consular rank, a citizen of singular gentleness and modesty of character, (a man of whom I cannot sufficiently wonder how you can dare to look him in the face,) to be kicked and trampled on by your attendants; after you had driven him out of the city without being condemned, having proposed a most tyrannical privilegium against him; after you had confined the first man in the whole earth to his house; after you had occupied the forum with armed bands of profligate men; did you then place the image of Liberty in that house, which was of itself a proof of your most cruel tyranny and of the miserable slavery of the Roman people?
Was he the man whom Liberty ought, of all men in the world, to have driven from his house, whose existence was the only thing that prevented the whole city from coming under the power of slaves?
But from whence was that Liberty brought?
for I sought for her diligently.
She is said to have been a prostitute at Tanagra.
At no great distance from Tanagra a marble image of her was placed on her tomb.
A certain man of noble birth, not altogether unconnected with this holy priest of Liberty, carried off this statue to decorate his aedileship.
He had in truth cherished the idea of surpassing all his predecessors in the splendour of his appointments.
Therefore he brought away to his own house, like a prudent man as he was, all the statues and pictures, all the decorations of any sort, that remained in the temples and public places, out of Greece and out of all the islands, for the sake of doing honour to the Roman people.
After he understood that he might give up the aedileship, and still be appointed praetor by Lucius Piso the consul, provided he had any competitor whose name began with the same letter as his own, he stowed away what he had prepared for his aedileship in two places, partly in his strong-box, and partly in his gardens.
He gave the statue which he had taken from the prostitute's tomb to that fellow, because it was much more suited to such people as he is than to Public Liberty.
Can any one dare to profane this goddess, the statue of a harlot, the ornament of a tomb, carried off by a thief; and consecrated by a sacrilegious infidel?
Is it she who is to drive me from my house?
Is she the avenger of this afflicted city? Is she to be adorned with the spoils of the republic?
Is she to be a part of that monument which has been erected so as to be a token of the oppression of the senate, and to keep alive for ever the recollection of this man's infamy?
O Quintus Catulus!
(Shall I appeal rather to the father, or to the son?
The memory of the son is fresher, and more closely connected with my exploits.) How greatly were you mistaken when you thought that I should find the greatest possible reward a reward, too, becoming every day greater in this republic when you said that it was impossible for there to be at the same time in this city two consuls hostile to the republic.
Two have been found who gave over the senate bound hand and foot to a frantic tribune; who, by edicts and positive commands, prohibited the conscript fathers from entreating the people and coming to it as suppliants on my behalf; who looked on while my house was being sacked and plundered; who ordered the damaged relics of my property to be carried off to their own houses.
I come now to the father.
You, O Quintus Catulus, chose the house of Marcus Fulvius, though he was the father-in-law of your own brother, to be the monument of your victories, in order that every recollection of that man who had embraced designs destructive of the republic should be entirely removed from the eyes and eradicated from the minds of men
if, when you were building that portico, any one had said to you that the time would come when that tribune of the people, who had despised the authority of the senate and the opinion of all virtuous men, should injure and overthrow your monument, while the consuls were not looking on only, but even assisting in the work, and should join it to the house of that citizen who as consul had defended the republic in obedience to the authority of the senate; would you not have answered that that could not possibly happen, unless the republic itself was previously overthrown?
But remark the intolerable audacity of the man, and at the same time his headlong and unbridled covetousness.
That fellow never thought of any monument, or any religion;
he wished to dwell splendidly and magnificently, and to unite two large and noble houses.
At the same moment that my departure deprived him of all pretence for bloodshed, he was begging Quintus Seius to sell him his house; and when he refused to do so, he threatened that he would block up all his lights.
Postumus declared that as long as he was alive that house should never belong to Clodius.
That acute young man took the hint from his own mouth, as to what was best for him to do; and in the most open manner he took the man off by poison.
He bought the house, after wearying out all the other bidders, for almost half as much again as he thought it really worth.
What is my object in making this statement.
That house of mine is almost entirely empty; scarcely one-tenth part of my house has been added to Catulus's portico.
The pretence was a promenade, and a monument, and that Tanagran lady Liberty, (all Roman liberty having been entirely put down).
He had set his heart upon a portico with private chambers, paved to the distance of three hundred feet, with a fine court surrounded by a colonnade, on the Palatine Hill, commanding a superb view, and everything else in character, so as far to surpass all other houses in luxury and splendour.
And that scrupulous man, while he was both buying and selling my house at the same moment, still, even in a time of such darkness as that, did not venture to give in his own name as the purchaser.
He put up that fellow Scato, a man whose virtue it was, no doubt, that had made him poor; so poor that among the Marsi, where he was born, he had no house in which he could take refuge from the rain and yet he said now that he had purchased the finest house on the Palatine hill.
The lower part of the house he assigned not to his own Fonteian family, but to the Clodian family which he had quitted; but of all the numerous family of Clodius, no one applied for any share in his liberality except those who were utterly destitute from indigence and wickedness.
Will you, O priests, sanction this universal and unprecedented tyranny of every sort, this impudence and audacity and covetousness?
Oh, says he, "a priest was present."
Are you not ashamed, when the matter is being discussed before the priests, to say that a priest was present, not the college of priests?
especially when, as tribune of the people, you had power to summon them and even to compel their attendance.
Be it so. You did not call in the whole college.
Well. Which of the college was it who was present?
For he had vested that authority in one individual which belongs to all of them; however, the age and rank of the man invest him with additional dignity.
There was need also of knowledge and although they were all of them learned men, still no doubt age gives them still more experience.
Who then was it who was present?
The brother, says he, "of my wife."
If we ask what was his authority, although he is of such an age that he cannot as yet have much, still even such authority as a young man can have is to be considered as diminished in his case, by reason of his near connection with and relationship to you.
But if we ask what knowledge he has, who could have less than he who had only come into the college a few days before?
And he was the more bound to you by your recent kindness to him, inasmuch as he had seen himself, the brother of your wife, preferred by you to your own brother.
Although in that matter you took care that your brother should not be able to accuse you.
Do you then call that a dedication, to which you were not able to invite the college of pontiffs, or any single priest distinguished by honours conferred on him by the Roman people nor even any other young man, though you had some most intimate friends in the college?
He only was present, if indeed he was present, whom you yourself instigated, whom his sister entreated, and whom his mother compelled to be so.
Take care now, O priests, what decision you give in this cause of mine, concerning the fortunes of all the citizens.
Do you think that the house of every single citizen can be consecrated by the word of a priest, if he takes hold of a door-post and says something or other?
But those dedications, and those religious ceremonies respecting temples and shrines, were instituted by our ancestors to do honour to the immortal gods, without inflicting any misfortune on their fellow-citizens.
A tribune of the people has been found, who, assisted by the forces of the consuls, has rushed with all the violence of insanity on that citizen, whom, after he had been beaten down, the republic itself raised up again with its own hands.
What next?
Suppose any one like that fellow, for there will not be wanting men who will be willing to imitate him, should by violence oppress some one who does not resemble me, to whom the republic does not owe as much as it does to me, and should dedicate his house by the agency of one priest; will you determine by your authority that a deed done in that manner ought to stand?
Will you say, "What priest will such a man be able to find?"
What?
Cannot a tribune of the people be himself a priest also at the same time?
Marcus Drusus, that most illustrious tribune of the people, was a priest also.
Therefore, if he had taken hold of a door-post of the house of Quintus Caepio his enemy, and had uttered a few words, would the house of Caepio have been dedicated to the gods?
I say nothing here about the privileges of the priesthood, nor about the language of the dedication itself;
I say nothing about religion, or religious ceremonies; I do not deny that I am ignorant of those matters, of which I should conceal my knowledge, even if I were acquainted with them, that I might not appear troublesome to others, and over curious to you;
although many particulars of your usages do escape, and often reach the ears of the laity.
I think, for instance, that I have heard that at the dedication of a temple, a door-post must be taken hold of.
For the door-post is there where the entrance to the temple and its folding-door are.
But no one ever took hold of the posts of a promenade in dedicating that; but if you have dedicated a statue or an altar, that cannot be moved from its place afterwards without impiety.
But you will not be able now to allege this, since you have said that the priest did lay hands on the post.
Although, why do I say anything about the dedication? or why do I discuss your right and the religious features of the case, contrary to my original intention?
But, even if I were to allow that everything had been done with the regularities of expression, according to ancient and established usages, I should still defend myself by the common law of the republic.
When, after the departure of that citizen, to whose single exertions the senate and all good men had so often decided that the safety of the state was owing, you, with the aid of two most wicked consuls, were keeping down the republic which was groaning under the oppression of your most shameful robberies; when you had dedicated, with the countenance of some obscure priest, the house of that man who was unwilling that the country which had been preserved by him should perish on any pretence connected with him; could the republic when it had recovered itself endure that?
Once, O priests, give an opening for such religious acts as this, and you will very soon find no escape at all for any one's property.
If a priest has laid his hand on a door-post, and has transferred expressions intended for the honour of the immortal gods to the injury of the citizens, will the holy name of religion avail to procure the ratification of such an injury, and yet will it not avail if a tribune of the people consecrates the goods of any citizen with a form of words no less ancient and almost equally solemn?
But Caius Atinius, within the recollection of our fathers, consecrated the property of Quintus Metellus, who, as censor, had expelled him from the senate (your grandfather, O Quintus Metellus, and yours, O Publius Servilius, and your great-grandfather, O Publius Scipio;) placing a little brazier on the rostra and summoning a flute-player to assist him.
What then?
Did that frenzy of a tribune of the people, derived from some precedents of extreme antiquity, do any injury to Quintus Metellus, that great and most illustrious man?
Certainly not.
We have seen a tribune of the people do the same thing to Cnaeus Lentulus the censor.
Did he then at all bind the property of Lentulus to any peculiar sanctity?
But why should I speak of other men?
You yourself; I say, with your head veiled, having summoned an assembly, having placed a brazier on the spot, consecrated the property of your dear friend Gabinius, to whom you had given all the kingdoms of the Syrians, and Arabians, and Persians.
But if nothing was really effected at that time, why should my property be affected by the same measures?
if, on the other hand, that consecration was valid, why did that abyss of a man, who had swallowed up with you all the blood of the republic, raise a villa as high as the heavens on my Tusculan estate, out of the funds of the public treasury?
And why have I not been allowed to look upon the ruins of my property, I, who am the only person who prevented the whole city from being in a similar condition?
I say nothing about Gabinius.
Why? Did not Lucius Munius, the most fearless and most excellent of all men, consecrate your property by your own precedent?
And if, because you yourself are concerned, you say that that action ought not to be ratified, did you in that splendid tribuneship of yours establish laws which, the moment that they were turned against yourself, you repudiated, though you made use of them to ruin other people?
If that consecration be legal, then what is there in your property which can be applied to other than holy uses?
Or has a consecration no power, while a dedication draws with it the sanctions of religion?
What then was the meaning of your summoning that flute-player to be a witness? What was the object of your brazier? What became of your prayers? What was the meaning of all your old-fashioned expressions?
Did you wish to lie, to deceive, to abuse the divine reverence due to the immortal gods, in order to strike terror into men?
For if that act is once ratified I say nothing about Gabinius, most certainly your house and whatever else you have is consecrated to Ceres.
But if that was a joke of yours, what can be more impure than you who have polluted every sort of religion by lies and adulteries?
"Well, I confess," says he, "that in the case of Gabinius I did behave wickedly."
You see now that the punishment which was established by you with reference to another has been turned against yourself.
But, O man, O you who are the very model of every possible crime and wickedness, do you deny with respect to me that which you admit in the case of Gabinius, a man the immodesty of whose childhood, the lust of whose youth, the disgrace and indigence of whose subsequent life, the open robberies of whose consulship, we have seen, a man to whom even calamity itself could not happen undeservedly?
that that was a more solemn act which you performed with one young man alone for your witness, than it would have been if you had had the whole assembly in that character?
Oh, says he, "a dedication is an act which carries the greatest possible quantity of sanctity with it."
Does not Numa Pompilius appear to be speaking to you?
Learn his speech by heart, O priests, and flamens.
Do you too, O king of the sacrifices, learn of the man of your own family; although, indeed, he has quitted that family; but still learn from a man entirely devoted to religious observances, and just, and deeply skilled in all questions of religion.
What?
in the case of a dedication do not people inquire who says such and such a thing, and what he says, and how?
Do you so confuse and mix up these matters, that whoever chooses can dedicate whatever he chooses, and in whatever manner he chooses?
Who were you who performed the dedication? By what right did you do so? By what law? According to what precedent? By what power?
When and where had the Roman people appointed you to manage that business?
For I see that there is an old tribunitian law, which forbids any one to consecrate any house, land, or altar, without the order of the Roman people.
Quintus Papirius, who proposed this law, did not perceive nor suspect that there would be danger lest hereafter the houses or possessions of citizens who had not been condemned might be consecrated.
For that could not lawfully be done; nor had any one ever done such a thing; nor was there any reason why a prohibition should be issued, the effect of which appeared likely to be not so much to deter people from an action as to remind them of it.
But because buildings were consecrated, I do not mean the licenses of private persons, but those which are called sacred buildings, and because lands were consecrated, not in such a way that any one who chose might consecrate our farms, but that a general might consecrate lands taken from the enemy;
and because altars were erected, which carried with them a degree of sanctity to the place in which they were consecrated; he forbade all these things to be done unless the people ordered them.
And if your interpretation of these edicts be that they were framed with reference to our houses and lands, I make no objection.
But I ask, what law was passed that you should consecrate my house? where this power was given to you? and by what right you did it?
And I am not now arguing about religion, but about the property of all of us; nor about the sacerdotal law, but about the common law.
The Papirian law forbids any building to be consecrated without the command of the people.
Grant that that law refers to our houses, and not to the public temples.
Show me one word of consecration in that law of yours if it is a law, and not merely an expression of your wickedness and cruelty.
But if then, at the time of that shipwreck of the republic, everything necessary had occurred to you, or if the man who drew that law for you at the time of that general conflagration of the state had not been making contracts with the Byzantine exiles and with the royal ambassadors, but had his mind at leisure to attend to (what I will not call the ordinances, but) the monstrous papers which he was drawing, then you would have done what you wanted, if not in fact at all events as far as regular legal language went.
But at one and the same time bonds for money were being drawn, treaties with provinces were being entered into, titles of kings were being put up for sale, the numbering of all the slaves was going on over the whole city street by street enemies were being reconciled, new commands were being given to the Roman youth, poison was being prepared for that unhappy Quintus Seius, designs were being formed for assassinating Cnaeus Pompeius, the bulwark and protector of the empire, and to prevent the senate from having any power, and to cause the good to mourn for ever, and to reduce the captive republic, by the treachery of the consuls, to a state of subjection to the violence of the tribunes.
When such numerous and such important designs were all on foot, it is no wonder, especially while you were both in such a state of frenzy and blindness, that many things escaped both his notice and yours.
But take notice now, what the effect of this Papirian law is in such a case as this; not such a case as you bring forward, full of wickedness and frenzy.
Quintus Marcius the censor had made a statue of Concord, and had erected it in a public place.
When Caius Cassius the censor had transported it into the senate-house, he consulted your college, and asked whether there was any reason why he should not dedicate that statue and the senate-house to Concord.
I beseech you, O priests, compare man with man, the one time with the other, this case with that case.
The one man was a censor of the greatest moderation and of the highest character; the other was a tribune of the people, of preeminent wickedness and audacity.
That period was one of tranquillity, when the people enjoyed a full measure of liberty, and the senate all its legitimate authority; but your time was a time when the liberty of the Roman people was oppressed, and when the authority of the senate was destroyed.
The proposed measure was one full of justice, wisdom, and dignity.
For the censor, to whose power (though you have abolished that) our ancestors chose to commit the decision respecting the dignity of each member of the senate, wished the statue of Concord to be in the senate-house, and wished also to dedicate the senate-house to that goddess.
It was a noble intention, and one worthy of all praise.
For he thought that by that measure he was enjoining that opinions should be delivered without party spirit or dissension, if he bound the place itself and the temple of public counsel by the religions reverence due to the goddess Concord.
You, when you were keeping down the enslaved and oppressed city by the sword, by fear, by edicts, by privileges, by bands of abandoned men constantly present, and by the fear of the army which was absent and by threats of bringing it up, and by the assistance of the consuls, and by your nefarious agreement with them, erected a statue of Liberty in a mocking and shameless spirit, rather than with even any pretence to religion.
He was dedicating a thing in the senate-house, which he was able to dedicate without any inconvenience to any one.
You have erected an image not of public Liberty, but of licentiousness, on what I may call the blood and bones of that citizen who of all others has deserved best of the republic.
And moreover he referred his design to the sacred college: to whom did you refer yours?
If you deliberated at all, if you had anything which you wished to expiate, or any domestic sacrifice which you desired to institute, still according to the ancient practice of other men you should have referred the matter to the priests.
When you were beginning a new temple in the most beautiful spot in the city, with some wicked and unheard of object, did you not think that you ought to refer the matter to the public priests?
But if you did not think it desirable to consult the whole college of priests, was there no single one of them who seemed to you a suitable man (of those who are eminent among all the citizens for age and honour and authority) for you to communicate your intention about the dedication to him?
The truth was, not that you despised, but that you were afraid of their dignity.
Could you have dared to ask Publius Servilius or Marcus Lucullus, (men by the assistance of whose wisdom and authority I as consul snatched the republic out of your hands, out of your jaws,) with what words or with what ceremony you could consecrate the house of a citizen?
and in the next place, of that citizen, to whom the chief of the senate, to whom all ranks of men, to whom all Italy, to whom every nation upon earth, bore testimony that he had saved this city and empire?
What would you say, O you most wicked and mischievous disgrace to the city?
"Come forward, come forward, Lucullus, Servilius, while I dedicate the house of Cicero.
Come, stand before me, and take hold of the door-post."
You are, in truth, a man of extraordinary audacity and impudence, but still your eyes, and countenance, and voice would have failed you while those men who, by their dignity, upheld the character of the Roman people and the authority of the empire, were striking terror into you by their dignified language, and saying that it would be impious for them to be present at your frantic deeds, and at such wicked and parricidal attacks on the country.
And when you saw this, then you betook yourself to your kinsman, not that he was selected by you, but that he was left you by the rest.
And yet I believe that he, if he is really descended from those men who, it is traditionally reported, learnt their sacred ceremonies from Hercules himself; after he had completed his labours, would not have been so cruel with respect to the distress of a brave man, as with his own hands to place a tomb on the head of a man still living and breathing; as he either actually said and did nothing at all, and bore this as a punishment for the rashness of his mother, that he lent his presence though mute, and his name to this sin; or, if he did say anything in a few faltering words, and if he did touch the door-post with trembling hand, at all events he did nothing regularly or solemnly, nothing according to proper usages or established forms.
He had seen Murena, his stepfather, the consul elect in company with the Allobroges, bring to me when I was consul the proofs of the conspiracy for the general destruction.
He had heard from him that he had twice received safety from me, once as an individual, and a second time in common with the whole body of citizens.
Who is there, then, who can think that this new priest, performing this his first religious ceremony, and uttering these his first official words since his admission to the priesthood, would not have felt his tongue grow mute, and his hand grow torpid, and his mind become weakened and fail through fear; especially when out of all that numerous college he saw neither king, nor flamen, nor priest and was compelled against his will to become a partner in another's wickedness, and was enduring the most terrible punishment of his most disgraceful relationship?
But to return to the question of the vindication of the public rights, which the priests themselves have always adapted not only to their own ceremonies, but also to the commands of the people.
You have a statement in your records, that Caius Cassius the censor consulted the pontifical college about dedicating the statue of Concord, and that Marcus Aemilius, the Pontifex Maximus, answered him on behalf of the college, that unless the Roman people had appointed him by name to superintend that business, it did not appear to them that the statue could properly be consecrated.
What more?
When Licinia, a vestal virgin, a woman of the highest rank, and invested with the most holy of all priesthoods, in the consulship of Titus Flamininus and Quintus Metellus, had dedicated an altar, and a little chapel, and a cushion at the foot of the sacred rock; did not Sextus Julius the praetor refer that matter to this college, in obedience to the authority of the senate?
when Publius Scaevola, the Pontifex Maximus, answered on behalf of the college, "that what Licinia, the daughter of Caius, had dedicated in a public place without the authority of the people, did not appear to be holy."
And with what impartiality and with what diligence the senate annulled that act, you will easily see from the words of the resolution of the senate.
Do not you see that a commission is given to the praetor of the city, to take care that that which she had consecrated should not be accounted holy?
and that, if any letters had been engraved or inscribed upon it, they should be removed?
Shame on the times, and on their principles!
Then the priests forbade the censor, a most holy man, to dedicate it statue to Concord in a temple which had not been duly consecrated.
And after that the senate voted that that altar, which had been consecrated on a most venerable spot, should be taken down in obedience to the authority of the priests, and did not permit any memorial of writing to exist as a relic of that dedication.
You, O storm ravaging your country, you whirlwind and tempest dispelling peace and tranquillity, did you hope that the republic would endure what you (in the shipwreck of the state, when darkness was spread over the republic, when the Roman people was overwhelmed, when the senate was overturned and expelled,) pulled down and built up?
what you, after having violated every feeling of religion, still polluted under the name of religion?
that it would endure the monument of the destruction of the republic which you erected in the house of this citizen who is now speaking, and in the city which he had preserved by his own exertions and dangers, to the disgrace of the knights and the grief of all virtuous men; that it would endure the inscription which you had placed there after having erased the name of Quintus Catulus, one moment longer than the time that it was absent from these walls, from which it had been driven at the same time that I myself was?
But if, O priests, you decide that no man who had a right to do so by law performed this dedication, and that nothing was dedicated which lawfully might be; then why need I prove that third point which I originally proposed to establish; namely, that he did not dedicate it with those forms and words which such ceremonies require?
I said at the beginning, that I was not going to say anything about your peculiar science; nor about the sacrifices, nor about the recondite laws of the priests.
The arguments which I have hitherto advanced about the right of dedication, have not been drawn from any secret description of books, but are taken from common sources, from things openly done by the magistrates and referred to the sacred college, from resolutions of the senate, and from the law.
Those inner mysteries, what ought to be said, or enjoined, or touched, or taken hold of are still your own.
But if it were proved that all these things had been done in a manner equal to the knowledge of Coruncanius, who is said to have been the most experienced of priests; or if that great man Marcus Horatius Pulvillus, who when many men out of envy endeavoured to hinder his dedication by false pretences about religion, resisted them, and with the greatest firmness dedicated the Capitol, had himself presided at such a dedication as this, still I say that accuracy of religious observance would not hallow a wicked act;
much less can that act have any validity which an unskillful young man, a new priest, influenced by the prayers of his sister and the threats of his mother, ignorant and unwilling, without colleagues, without books, without any adviser or assistant, is said to have performed by stealth, with trembling heart and faltering tongue; especially when that impure and impious enemy of all religion, who in defiance of all that is right or holy had often been as a woman among men, and a man among women, completed the business in so hurried and disorderly a manner, that neither his senses, nor his voice, nor his language, had any consistency in them.
It was then reported to you, O priests, and after that it became a common topic of conversation, how he, with preposterous language with ill-omened auspices, at times interrupting himself, doubting, fearing, hesitating, pronounced and did everything in a manner wholly different from that which you have recorded as proper in your books.
It is, indeed, not very strange that in doing an act of such wickedness and such insanity, even his audacity could not wholly repress his fear.
In truth, if no robber was ever so savage and inhuman, as, when he had plundered temples, and then, having been excited by dreams or some superstitious feelings, consecrated some altar on a desert shore, not to shudder in his mind when compelled to propitiate with his prayers the deity whom he has insulted by his wickedness; what do you suppose must have been the agitation of mind of that plunderer of every temple, and of every house, and of the whole city, when he was consecrating one single altar to avert the vengeance due to his numberless acts of wickedness?
He could not possibly (although the insolence of power had elated his mind, and although he was armed by nature with incredible audacity) fail to blunder in his proceedings, or to keep constantly making mistakes, especially when he had a priest and teacher who was compelled to teach before he had learnt himself.
There is great power, not only in the divinity of the immortal gods, but also in the republic itself.
When the immortal gods saw the guardian and protector of their temples driven away in a most wicked manner, they were unwilling to quit their temples and to remove into his house.
Therefore they alarmed the mind of that most insensible man with fear and anxiety.
But the republic, although that was banished at the same time with myself, was still constantly present to the eyes of its destroyer, and from his excited and kindled frenzy was constantly demanding my restoration and its own.
What marvel then is it, if he, urged on by the insanity of fear and drawn on headlong by wickedness, was neither able properly to perform the ceremonies which he had begun, nor to utter one single word in due order with proper solemnity?
And as this is the case, O priests, recall now your attention from this subtle argument of ours to the general state and interests of the republic, which you have before now had many gallant men to assist you in supporting, but which in this cause you are upholding on your own shoulders alone.
To you the whole future authority of the senate, which you yourselves always led in a most admirable manner during the discussion of my case; to you that most glorious agitation of Italy, and that thronging hither of all the municipal towns; to you the Campus Martius, and the unanimous voice of all the centuries, of which you were the chiefs and leaders; to you every company in the city every rank of men all men who have any property or any hopes, think that all their zeal for my dignity, all their decisions in my favour are not only entrusted, but put wholly under your protection.
Lastly the immortal gods themselves, who protect this city and empire, appear to me to have claimed the credit of my return and of the happiness which it has diffused as due to the power and judicial sentence of their priests in order to make it evident to all nations and to all posterity that I had been restored to the republic by divine agency.
For this return of mine, O priests and this restoration consists in recovering my house, my possessions, my altars, my hearths, and my household gods.
And if that fellow with his most wicked hands tears up their dwellings and abodes and with the consuls for his leaders, as if the city were taken, has thought it becoming to destroy this house alone, as if it were the house of its most active defender, still those household gods, those deities of my family, will be by you replaced in my house at the same time as myself.
Wherefore, O I pray and entreat you, O thou great God of the Capitol, thee whom the Roman people has styled, on account of your kindnesses to us, All Good, and, on account of your might All Powerful;
and you, O royal Juno; and you, O guardian of the city, O Minerva, you who have at all times been my assistant in my counsels, and the witness of my exertions; and you too, you who above all others have claimed me back and recalled me, you, for the sake of whose habitations most especially it is that I am engaged in this contest, O household gods of my fathers, and of my family; and you too, who preside over this city and this republic, you do I entreat, from whose spires and temples I once repelled that fatal and impious flame, you too do I supplicate, O Vesta, whose chaste priestesses I have defended from the rage and frenzy and wickedness of men whose renowned and eternal fire I could not suffer either to be extinguished in the blood of the citizens or to be confused with the conflagration of the whole city,
I entreat you all that, if at that almost fatal crisis of the republic I exposed my life, in defence of your ceremonies and temples, to the rage and arms of abandoned citizens; and it at a subsequent time, when the destruction of all good men was aimed at through my ruin, I invoked your aid, I recommended myself and my family to your protection, I devoted myself and my life, on condition that it both at that moment, and previously, and in my consulship, disregarding all my own advantage, all my own interests, and all reward for my exertions, I strove with all my anxiety and thoughts and vigilance for nothing but the safety of my fellow-citizens, I might be allowed some day or other to enjoy my country restored to me; but if my counsels had been of no service to my country, then, that I might endure everlasting misery, separated from all my friends; I may be allowed to think this devotion of my life accepted and approved by the gods, when I am by your favour restored to my home.
For at present, O priests, I am not only deprived of my house, which you are at present inquiring into, but of the whole city, to which I appear to be restored.
In the most frequented and finest part of the city, look to that (I will not say monument, but) wound of the country.
And as you must see that that sight is to me one which is more to be detested and avoided than death itself; do not, I entreat you, allow that man by whose return you have thought that the republic too would be restored, to be deprived not only of the ornaments suited to his dignity, but even of his part in the city.
I am not moved by the plundering of my property, nor by the razing of my houses, nor by the devastation of my farms, nor by the booty most cruelly taken by the consuls out of my possessions.
I have always considered these as perishable and fleeting gifts of fortune and of the times, and not as proofs of virtue or genius; and they are things, too, of which I have never thought it becoming to wish for plenty and abundance, so much as for moderation in enjoying them, and patience if deprived of them.
In truth, the moderate amount of my family property very nearly corresponds to my necessities; and I shall leave a sufficiently ample patrimony to my children in the name and memory of their father.
But I cannot without great discredit to the republic, and great shame and misery to myself, continue deprived of my house, which has been taken from me by wickedness, and, under pretence of religion, built up again with even more impiety than it was pulled down.
Wherefore, if you consider that my return is pleasing and acceptable to the immortal gods, to the senate, to the Roman people, to all Italy, to the provinces, to foreign nations, and to yourselves who have always taken the lead in and exercised a principal influence over all measures connected with my safety, I beg and entreat you, O priests, now, since it is the will of the senate that you should do so, to place me, whom you have restored by your authority and zeal and votes to my country, with your own hands in my house.
Yesterday, O conscript fathers, when I was greatly moved by the thoughts of your dignity, and of the great attendance of the Roman knights to whom a senate was given, I thought myself bound to check the shameless impudence of Publius Clodius, when he was hindering the cause of the publicans from being proceeded with by the most foolish possible questions, and was studying to save Publius Tullio the Syrian and was, even before your eyes selling himself to him to whom, indeed, he had already been entirely sold.
Therefore I checked the man in his frenzy and exultation, the very moment that I gave him a hint of the danger of a public trial; and by two half-uttered words I bridled all the violence and ferocity of that gladiator.
But he, ignorant what sort of men the consuls were, pale and fuming with me burst on a sudden out of the senate house, with some broken and empty threats and with those denunciations with which he used to terrify us in the time of Piso and Gabinius.
And when I began to press upon him, as he was departing, I received the greatest reward of my exertions by all of you rising up at the same time with me, and by all the publicans thronging round me to escort me.
But that senseless man stopped on a sudden out of countenance, colourless, and voiceless; then he looked back; and, as soon as he beheld Cnaeus Lentulus the consul, he fell down almost on the threshold of the senate house from the recollection, I imagine, of his dear friend Gabinius and from regret for Piso.
And why need I speak at all of his unbridled and headlong fury?
He cannot be wounded by me with more severe language than he was on the instant being crushed and overwhelmed at the very moment of his acting in that manner by Publius Servilius.
And even if I were able to equal the extraordinary and almost divine energy and dignity of that man, still I cannot doubt that those weapons which out enemy hurled at him would appear less powerful and less sharp than those which the colleague of his father aimed at him.
But still I wish to explain the principles of my conduct to those men who thought that I was carried away yesterday by my indignation, and that, out of passion, I made a wider digression than the deliberate calmness of a philosopher allowed.
I did nothing in anger nothing from not being able to restrain my temper nothing which I had not maturely considered and determined on a long time before.
For I, O conscript fathers, have always professed myself an enemy to those two men who were bound to have defended and were able to have preserved both me and the republic; and who though they were called to the performance of their duty as consuls by the very ensigns of their office, and to the preservation of my safety, not only by your authority but even by your prayers, first of all deserted, then betrayed, and last of all opposed me; and, having received the rewards of their nefarious covenant, wished utterly to overwhelm and destroy me together with the republic; and who, during the time of their magistracy and command, bloody and fatal that it was, were neither able to defend the walls of our allies from chastisement, nor to inflict chastisement on the cities of the enemy; but who bore along into all my houses and lands, razing, and conflagration, and destruction, and depopulation, and devastation, to the great enriching of themselves with my plunder.
Against these furies and firebrands, with these destructive monsters and pests, which have been (I may almost say) desolating this empire, I do say that I have undertaken inexpiable war; and yet, even that is not as great as my sufferings and those of my relations require, though it may be enough to satisfy your indignation and that of all virtuous men.
But my hatred towards Clodius is not greater this day than it was then, when I knew that he was scorched, as it were, by those most holy fires, and that he had escaped in female attire from the house of the Pontifex Maximus, after attempting an act of most atrocious licentiousness.
Then, I say, then I perceived, and foresaw long beforehand, how great a tempest was being raised, how great a storm was threatening the republic.
I saw that that ill-omened wickedness, that that intolerable audacity of a young man, mad, nobly born, and disgraced as he was, could not be hindered from breaking through the bounds of tranquillity; that that evil would certainly break out some day or other to the destruction of the state, if it were allowed to remain unpunished.
There has not been much since to add to my detestation of that man.
For he has not done anything against me out of hatred to me, but out of hatred to strictness, out of hatred to dignity, out of hatred to the republic.
He has not insulted me more than he has the senate, or the Roman knights, or all good men, or the whole of Italy.
Lastly, he has not behaved more wickedly towards me than he has towards the immortal gods.
In truth, he has polluted those gods with his impiety whom no one before ever did.
Towards me his disposition has been the same as that of his dear friend Catiline would have been, if he had been victorious.
Therefore, I never thought it necessary for me to prosecute him, any more than that blockhead, whose very nation we should be ignorant of if he did not himself say that he was a Ligurian.
For why should I pursue this animal, this beast, bribed by the food and acorns thrown him by my enemy?
a fellow, who, if he had only sense to know to what wickedness he has bound himself, would be, I doubt not, most wretched; but if he is not aware of it there is some danger lest he may save himself by the excuse of stupidity.
There is also this consideration which weighs with me that, according to universal expectation, that man seems devoted and marked out as the victim of that most gallant and most illustrious man Titus Annius; from whom it would be a scandalous thing for me to snatch the credit which is destined for, and already openly promised to him, when it is owing to his exertions that I myself have recovered my own dignity and safety.
In truth, as that great man, Publius Scipio, appears to me to have been born for the overthrow and destruction of Carthage, he being the only man who, at last, as it were, by a special decree of destiny, did overthrow it after it had been besieged, attacked, undermined, and almost taken by many generals; so Titus Annius appears to have been born, and to have been given to the republic, by a sort of divine munificence as it were for the express purpose of repressing and extinguishing and utterly destroying that pest of the state.
He alone has discovered the way not only of defeating but also of fettering an armed citizen who was driving the citizens away, some by the sword, some by stones, was confining others to their houses and alarming the whole city, the senate house, the forum, and all the temples with bloodshed and conflagration.
I will never, with my own free will, take out of the hands of this man, being so good a man as one who has deserved so well of me and of his country, that criminal of all men in the world, whose enmity be has not only encountered, but has even sought for out of a regard for my safety.
But if, even now that he is entangled in all the dangers of the laws, surrounded by the hatred of all virtuous men, and hemmed in on all sides by the expectation or punishment which cannot be long delayed, still, hesitating and hampered as he is, he persists in rushing on, and making attacks upon me, I will resist him, and gaining the consent, or, perhaps, the assistance of Milo, I will frustrate his endeavours; as I did yesterday, when, while he was threatening me in dumb show, as I was standing near him, I just said one word about the beginning of legal proceedings and a trial.
He sat down. He did not say a word.
Suppose he had brought a charge against me, as he had threatened, I should have instantly taken steps to have him summoned to appear before the praetor in three days.
And let him restrain himself with the idea that if he is content with those acts of wickedness which he has already committed, he is already dedicated to Milo; but if he aims any dart against me, that then I shall immediately employ all the weapons of the courts of justice and of the laws.
And a little time ago, O conscript fathers, he held an assembly, and made a speech which was directed wholly against me.
And I will tell you the argument and sentiment which ran through the whole of his speech.
And when you have been sufficiently amused at the fellow's impudence, I will give you the details of everything that then took place.
Publius Clodius, O conscript fathers, made a long speech about religious observances, and sacrifices, and ceremonies.
Publius Clodius, I say, complained that the sacrifices and religious rites were neglected, profaned, and polluted.
It is no wonder if this seems to you an absurdity.
Indeed the very assembly which he himself had convened laughed at the idea of a man, who has been pierced, as be himself is in the habit of boasting, with two hundred resolutions of the senate against him, every one of which was passed against him because of matters connected with religion, of that fellow who carried his adulteries to the shrine of the Good Goddess herself; and who profaned those sacred rites which may not be seen without impiety by the eyes of a man even unintentionally, not only by the view of a man, but by lust and wickedness, complaining in a public assembly about the neglect of religion.
Therefore they are now expecting another speech from him on the subject of chastity.
For what difference does it make whether, when just driven from the most holy of altars, he makes complaints of the state of the sacrifices and religious observances; or whether, having just left his sister's bed-chamber, he speaks in defence of modesty and chastity?
In his harangue he recited the lately received answer of the soothsayers about the noises which have been heard; in which among many other things it is stated, (as you have heard yourselves,) that holy and sacred places had been treated as common.
Under that head he said that my house was intended, which had been consecrated by that holiest of pontiffs, Publius Clodius.
I am delighted at not only having a reasonable pretext for, but being even under an absolute necessity of speaking about this prodigy, which I am not sure that I may not call the most important one that has for many years been reported to this body.
For you find that by every part of this prodigy and of this answer, we have been warned, I may almost say by the voice of the all-good and all-powerful Jupiter himself, of the wickedness and frenzy of that man, and of the immense dangers which are impending over the state.
But first of all I will clear up the objections made on the score of religion in the case of my own house, if I am able to do so truly, and without leaving the least doubt in any one's mind; but if the very slightest scruple on the subject exists in any one's mind, I will obey the prodigies sent by the immortal gods, and comply with what is required by the reverence due to them not only with a patient but even with a willing mind.
But what house is there in the whole city so clear and free from all suspicion of being a consecrated building as this?
Although your houses, O conscript fathers, and those of all the other citizens, are, for much the greater part of them, free from all religious obligation, yet my house is the only one in the whole city which has been pronounced to be so by the decision of all the tribunals.
For I appeal to you, O Lentulus and to you, O Philippus.
After this reply was received from the soothsayers, the senate decreed that you should refer the question of hallowed and consecrated spots to this order of the senate.
Can you put any question to them concerning my house? which (as I have said) is the only one in the whole of the city which has been pronounced by every tribunal in it to be free from every sort of religious obligation;
which at first my enemy himself; even in the time of that storm and nocturnal darkness which was overwhelming the republic, when he had set down all his other wicked actions with that foul pen of his dipped in the mouth of Sextus Clodius, did not mark with one single letter indicating any religions liability.
And in the second place, the Roman people, whose power is supreme in all matters in the comitia centuriata, and by the suffrage of every age and every rank of men, ordered it to remain in the same condition in which it had previously been.
Afterwards, O conscript fathers, not because the matter was doubtful, but in order to cut off every argument from this furious man, if he chose to remain any longer in this city which he was anxious to destroy, you passed a decree that a reference should be made to the college of pontiffs as to the religious liability of my house.
What obligation can there possibly be from our greatest doubts and most serious religious apprehensions, as to which we may not be relieved by the answer and dictum of Publius Servilius or Marcus Lucullus alone?
In all matters concerning the public sacrifices, or the great games, or the ceremonies of the household gods, and of Vesta, the mother of the city, or even concerning that great sacrifice itself which is performed for the safety of the Roman people, and which since the first foundation of Rome has never been profaned except by the wickedness of this single holy guardian of religion, whatever three pontiffs have decided, has at all times appeared to the Roman people, and to the senate, and to the immortal gods themselves, sufficiently holy, sufficiently august, sufficiently religious.
But Publius Lentulus being both consul and pontiff, and Publius Servilius, and Marcus Lucullus, and Quintus Metellus, and Marcus Glabrio, and Marcus Messala, and Lucius Lentulus, the priest of Mars, and Publius Galba, and Quintus Metellus Scipio, and Caius Fannius, and Marcus Lepidus, and Lucius Claudius, the king of the sacrifices, and Marcus Scaurus, and Marcus Crassus, and Caius Curio, and Sextus Caesar, the priest of Jupiter, and Quintus Cornelius, and Publius Albinovanus, and Quintus Terentius, the lesser pontiffs, having investigated the case after it had been argued before them on two separate occasions, in the presence of a great number of the noblest and wisest of the citizens, all unanimously pronounced my house free from all religious obligation.
I say that so numerous a meeting of the college has never decided on any subject, not even concerning the rights or life of a vestal virgin, ever since the establishment of sacred ceremonies, though their antiquity is the same as that of the city itself;
although when an investigation into any crime is taking place it is of consequence that as many as possible should be present.
For the interpretation of a law given by the priests is on such a footing that it has the same force as a decision of the judges.
An explanation of what is required by religion can be properly given by one single experienced priest; but in a case of a trial for life, such a proceeding would be harsh and unjust.
Nevertheless, you will find this to be the case, that a greater number of pontiffs were assembled when they decided on the question concerning my house, than had ever met on any question concerning the ceremonies of the vestal virgins.
The next day the senate in a very full house, when you, O Lentulus, being the consul elect, made the motion, and Publius Lentulus and Quintus Metellus, the consuls, put it to the senate, when all the pontiffs who belonged to this order were present and when those who had precedence, from the distinctions which had been conferred on them by the Roman people, had made many speeches concerning the decision of the college, and when all of them had assisted in drawing up the decree, the senate, I say, voted that my house appeared, according to the decision of the pontiffs, to be free from all religious liability.
Is this then the place which of all others the soothsayers appear to intend to speak of as sacred, which is the only one of all private buildings in the whole city which has this argument to advance in support of its rights, that it has been adjudged not to be sacred by those very men who preside over all sacred things?
However, refer the matter to them, as you are bound to do according to the resolution of the senate.
Either the investigation will be allotted to you who were the first to pronounce an opinion respecting this house, and who have pronounced it free from all religious liability; or the senate itself will decide, which has already decided in the fullest possible house, that one single priest alone dissenting; or else, what will certainly be done, it will be referred back to the pontiffs, to whose authority, integrity, and prudence our ancestors entrusted all sacred and religious observances, whether private or public.
What then can these men decide different from what they have already decided?
There are many houses in this city, O conscript fathers; I do not know whether they are not nearly all held by thoroughly good titles, but still they are only private titles, titles derived from inheritance, from prescription, from purchase, or from mortgage.
But I assert that there is no other house whatever equally fenced round by private title and incontestable rights, and at the same time by every sort of public law of the highest authority, both human and divine.
For in the first place it was built by the authority of the senate, with the public money; and in the second place it has been fenced round and fortified against the impious violence of this gladiator by numerous resolutions of the senate.
At first a commission was given to those same magistrates in the preceding year, to whom at times of the greatest peril the whole republic is usually recommended, to take care that I was to be allowed to proceed in building without any hindrance from violence.
Afterwards, when that fellow had brought devastation on my estate with stones, and fire, and sword, the senate voted that those who had acted in that manner were liable to be proceeded against by the laws concerning violence which are in force against those who have attacked the whole republic.
But when you put the question, O you best and bravest of consuls within the memory of man, the same senate in a very full house decreed, that whoever injured my house would be acting against the interests of the republic.
I say that there never were so many resolutions of the senate passed about any public work, monument or temple, as about my house, the only house since the first foundation of the city which the senate has thought ought to be built at the public expense, released from all religious obligation by the pontiffs, defended by the magistrates, and put under the protection of the judges who were to punish all who injured it.
On account of his immense services to the republic, a house at Velia was given by a public vote to Publius Valerius.
But my house was restored to me on the Palatine Hill.
He had a spot of ground given him. I had walls also and a roof.
He had a house given to him which he was to defend by his rights as a private citizen; but I had one which all the magistrates were ordered to protect with the public force of the city.
And if I had all this owing to my own exertions, or if I had received it from any other persons except you, I would not mention it before you, lest I might appear to be boasting too much.
But as all these things have been given me by you, and as they are now being attacked by the tongue of that man by whose hand they were formerly overthrown, when you restored them with your own hands to me and to my children, I am not speaking of my own actions but of yours; nor am I afraid lest this public mention of all your kindness to me should appear to be not so much grateful as arrogant.
Although, if indeed a certain indignation which I cannot help feeling were to lead me who have exerted myself so much in the cause of the public safety at times to speaking some what boastfully when refuting the aspersions of wicked men who would not excuse me for so doing?
For I did see yesterday someone murmuring: and people said that he declared that he could not endure me because when I was asked by that foul traitor to his country to what city I belonged, I answered, with the approval of you and of the Roman knights also, that I belonged to a city which could not do without me.
He, I imagine, groaned at this.
What then was I to answer? (I ask that very man who cannot endure me.) That I was a Roman citizen?
It would have been a truly learned answer.
Should I have held my tongue?
That would have been a betrayal of my own cause.
Can any man when it is attempted to excite odium against him with respect to important affairs, reply with sufficient dignity to the abuse of his enemy without some praise of himself?
But no doubt he himself, when he is attacked, not only answers as well as he can, but is even glad to be prompted by his friends and to have an answer suggested to him.
But since I have now said enough respecting my own case, let us see now what it is that the soothsayers say.
For I confess that I have been greatly moved both by the magnitude of the prodigies, and by the solemnity of the answer, and by the unanimous and consistent language of the soothsayers.
Nor am I a man who, though I may perhaps appear to some men to be more addicted to the study of literature than the rest of those are who are occupied about state affairs as much as myself at all incline to derive delight from or to pursue those branches of learning which have a tendency to divert and deter our minds from the study of religion.
But in the first place, I have our ancestors as my leaders and tutors in paying proper respect to religion, men whose wisdom appears to me to have been so great, that those men are sufficiently, and more than sufficiently prudent, who are able I will not say to equal their prudence, but to be thoroughly aware how great it was; who thought that the stated and regular ceremonies were provided for by the establishment of the Pontificate, that due authority for the performance of all actions was to he derived from the auspices, that the ancient prophecies of our destinies were contained in the books of the prophets of Apollo, and the explanations of prodigies in the system of the Etrurians; and this last is of such weight that within our own recollection they have predicted to us in no obscure language, first of all those fatal beginnings of the Italian war, and after that the imminent danger and almost destruction of the time of Sulla and Cinna, and very lately this recent conspiracy for burning the city and destroying the empire.
In the next place, I knew that the most learned and the wisest men have both said many things and have left behind them many written books concerning the divine power of the immortal gods.
And although I see that those books are written with a godlike eloquence, still they are such that our ancestors appear to have taught those things to the writers, and not to have learnt of them.
In truth, who is there so senseless as either, when he looks up to heaven, not to feel that there are gods, or to think that those things are done by chance which are done with such wisdom, that scarcely any one by any amount of skill can comprehend their order and necessary dependence on each other?
or, when he has arrived at the knowledge that there are gods, not to understand that all this mighty empire has been originated, and increased, and preserved by their divine authority?
Let us, O conscript fathers, think as highly of ourselves as we please; and yet it is not in numbers that we are superior to the Spaniards, nor in personal strength to the Gauls, nor in cunning to the Carthaginians, nor in arts to the Greeks, nor in the natural acuteness which seems to be implanted in the people of this land and country, to the Italian and Latin tribes; but it is in and by means of piety and religion, and this especial wisdom of perceiving that all things are governed and managed by the divine power of the immortal gods, that we have been and are superior to all other countries and nations.
Wherefore, not to say any more about a doubtful matter, give, I pray you, your thoughts and attention, and do not lend your ears alone to the language of the soothsayers: "Because a noise and roaring has been heard in the Latin district."
I say nothing of the soothsayers, I say nothing of that ancient system, given, as men report, to Etruria by the immortal gods themselves; but cannot we ourselves be soothsayers here?
A certain obscure noise, and a horrible rattling of arms, has been heard in a neighbouring and suburban district.
Who is there of all those giants, whom the poets relate to have waged war against the immortal gods, so impious as not to confess that by this novel and mighty commotion the gods are foreshowing and predicting something important to the Roman people?
Concerning that matter it is written down that entreaties are to be addressed to Jupiter, Saturn, Neptune, Tellus, and the gods of heaven.
Well, I hear what gods have been offended and to whom atonement is due; but I want to know on account of what offences committed by men they have been offended.
On account of the games having been carelessly exhibited and polluted.
What games?
I appeal to you, O Lentulus; for the sacred cars and chariots, the singing, the sports, the libations, and feasts of the public games belong to your priesthood;
and I appeal to you, O pontiffs, to whom those who prepare the banquet for the all-good and all-powerful Jupiter report it if anything has been neglected or done improperly, and if you give sentence that it shall be so, those ceremonies are celebrated anew and repeated over again.
What games are they which have been exhibited without due diligence?
By what wickedness, by what sort of crime have they been polluted?
You will answer on behalf of yourself; and of your colleagues, and of the college of pontiffs, that none of these things have been treated contemptuously through the carelessness of anyone, or polluted by any wickedness, but that all the solemnities and practices of the games have been attended to with a proper observance of all necessary things, and with the strictest performance of all the usual ceremonies.
What games, then, are they which the soothsayers say have not been performed with due diligence, and have been polluted?
Those of which the immortal gods themselves and the blessed mother Cybele chose you you, O Cnaeus Lentulus, by the hands of whose ancestor she was originally received to be a spectator.
And unless you had chosen to be a spectator of the Megalesia on that day, I do not know whether we should have been allowed to be give and to complain of these things.
For an enormous multitude of slaves in a state of great excitement, collected out of all the streets by this religious aedile, burst in on a sudden upon the stage from all the arch-ways and doors at a given signal.
Your virtue, yours, I say, O Cnaeus Lentulus, was at that crisis shown to be equal to that formerly displayed by your ancestor as a private individual.
The senate standing up, and the Roman knights and all virtuous men, followed you, and your name and your command, and your voice, aspect, and authority, when he had handed over the senate and people of Rome, hampered by the dense body in which they were sitting, chained as it were to the spectacle, and hindered by the crowd and narrow space, to a multitude of slaves and buffoons.
Shall we say that, if a sacred dancer stops, or a flute-player has on a sudden ceased to play, or if a boy with both father and mother alive has ceased to touch the ground, or has lost his hold of the sacred car, or of the reins, or if an aedile has used a wrong word or made the slightest mistake, then the games have not been duly celebrated, and those mistakes are forced to be expiated and the minds of the immortal gods are appeased by their repetition;
and yet if the games are suddenly changed from a scene of joy to one of terror, if they have been, not interrupted, but broken up and put an end to, if those days of festival turned out nearly fatal to the through the wickedness of that man who wished to turn the games into a time of grief, shall we doubt what games that noise warns us have been polluted?
And if we wish to recollect those things which have been handed down to us traditionally about each of the gods, we have heard that this mighty Mother; whose games were thus violated and polluted, and turned almost to a massacre and to the destruction of the city, does roam over the fields and through the groves with a certain degree of noise and roaring.
She, then, she it is, who has displayed to the Roman people these tokens of wickedness, and revealed to them these indications of danger.
For why should I speak of those games which our ancestors ordered to be performed and celebrated on the Palatine Hill, in front of the temple, in the very sight of the mighty Mother, on the day of the Megalesia?
which are in their institution and in the manner in which they are celebrated, above all other games chaste, solemn, and holy; in which games that great man Publius Africanus the elder, in his second consulship, gave for the first time the senate a place in front of the seats belonging to the people.
Why need I tell how that foul pestilence polluted these games when if any freeman came near them either as a spectator or from some motive of religion, he was driven back by force and no matron approached them because of the number and violence of the slaves?
And so these games the reverence paid to which is so great that the goddess did not come to this city without having been sent for from the most distant countries, which are the only games which have not even a Latin name, so that by their very name the religion is declared to have been a foreign one and imported hither and to have been undertaken in the name of the mighty Mother, these games, I say, were celebrated by slaves, and had slaves alone for the spectators, and in every part, in this man's aedileship, were the Megalesia of slaves.
O ye immortal gods!
How could you speak more plainly to us if you were living among and associating with us?
You show us and plainly tell us that those games were profaned.
What can be mentioned more deformed, polluted, altered and perverted, than for the whole body of slaves, as if they had been liberated by the permission of the magistrates, to be turned loose into one theatre, and set as guards over another, so that one body of spectators might be exposed to the power of slaves, and that the other might consist entirely of slaves?
If during the games a swarm of bees had come on the stage, we should think it necessary to send for the soothsayers out of Etruria; and shall we all see on a sudden such vast swarms of slaves let loose upon the Roman people, blocked up and shut in, and not be moved by that?
And perhaps, in the case of a swarm of bees, the soothsayers would warn us from the written books of the Etruscans to guard against the slaves.
That then which we should guard against, if indicated by some disjointed prodigy admitting of divers interpretations, shall we not be afraid of when it is its own prodigy, and when the danger is in that very thing from which danger is dreaded?
Were such the Megalesia which your father celebrated?
Did your uncle celebrate them in such a manner as this?
And then he makes mention to me of his family, when he would rather celebrate the games after the fashion of Athenio or Spartacus, than like Caius or Appius Claudius.
When these great men were celebrating games, they ordered all the slaves to depart from the theatre.
But you turned slaves into one, and turned free men out of the other.
Therefore they, who formerly used to be separated from free men by the voice of the herald, now, at your games, separated free men from themselves not by their voice, but by force.
Did not even this occur to you, being a priest so well acquainted with the Sibylline oracles, that our ancestors derived these games from the Sibylline books?
if those books are yours, which you consult with imperious intentions, and read with profane eyes, and handle with polluted hands.
Formerly, then, by the advice of this prophetess, when Italy was wearied by the Punic war and harassed by Hannibal, our ancestors imported that sacred image and those sacred rites from Phrygia, and established them at Rome, where they were received by that man who was adjudged to be the most virtuous of all the Roman people, Publius Scipio Nasica, and by the woman who was considered the chastest of the matrons, Quinta Claudia; the old-fashioned strictness of whose sacrifice on that occasion your sister is considered to have imitated in a wonderful manner.
Did, then, neither your ancestors, connected as they were with these religious ceremonies, nor the priesthood itself, by which all these religious observances were established, nor the curule aedileship, which above all things is accustomed to uphold this worship, influence you to abstain from polluting those most holy games with every sort of crime, and polluting them with infamy, and involving them in guilt?
But why do I wonder?
when, having taken a bribe, you ravaged Pessinus itself, the habitation and home of the mother of the gods, and sold to Brogitarus a fellow half Gaul, half Greek, a profligate and impious man, whose agents, while you were tribune, used to pay you the money for your share of the work in the temple of Castor the whole of that place and the temple; when you dragged the priest from the very altar and cushion of the goddess; when you perverted those omens which all antiquity, which Persians, and Syrians, and all kings who have ever reigned in Europe and Asia have always venerated with the greatest piety; which, last of all; our own ancestors considered so sacred, that though we had the city and all Italy crowded with temples, still our generals in our most important and most perilous wars used to offer their vows to this goddess, and to pay them in Pessinus itself, at that identical principal altar and on that spot and in that temple.
And when Deiotarus was protecting this temple in the most holy manner with the deepest feelings of religion Deiotarus, of all allies the most faithful to this empire and the most devoted to our name you gave it to Brogitarus as I have said before, having sold it to him for a sum of money.
And yet you order this Deiotarus who has been repeatedly declared by the senate worthy of the name of king and adorned with the testimony of many most illustrious generals in his favour, to be styled king together with Brogitarus.
But one of them has been called king by the decision of the senate through my instrumentality.
Brogitarus has been called by you for money.
And I will think him a king, indeed, if he has any means of paying you what you have trusted him with on his note of hand.
For there are many royal qualities in Deiotarus; this was the most royal of all, that he gave you no money; that he did not repudiate that portion of your law which agreed with the decision of the senate, namely that he was a king; that he recovered Pessinus, which had been impiously violated by you and stripped of its priest and its sacrifices, in order to maintain it in its accustomed religion; that he does not suffer the ceremonies which have been received as handed down from the most remote antiquity, to be polluted by Brogitarus; and that he prefers to let his son-in-law be deprived of your liberality, rather than to allow that temple to lose the ancient reverence due to its religious character.
But to return to these answers of the soothsayers, the first of which is that respecting these games; who is there who does not confess that the whole of that answer and prophecy was delivered with reference to that fellow's games?
The answer about sacred and holy places comes next.
Oh, the marvellous impudence of the man!
do you dare to make mention of my house?
Entrust your own to the consuls, or the senate, or the college of pontiffs;
and mine, as I have said before, has been declared by all these three decisions to be free from all religions liability.
But in that house which you keep possession of after having slain Quintus Seius, a Roman knight and most excellent man, in the most open manner, I say that there was a shrine and altars.
I will prove and establish this fact by the registers of the censors, and by the recollection of many individuals.
Only let this question be discussed, (and it must be referred to you by virtue of that resolution of the senate which has lately been passed,) and I have plenty to say on the subject of religious places.
When I have spoken of your house, in which, however, a chapel has been put up in such a way that another built it, and you have only got to pull it down, then I will see whether it is necessary for me to speak also of other places.
For some people think that it belongs to me to open the armoury of the temple of Tellus.
They say that it is not long ago that it was open, and I recollect it myself.
Now they say that the most holy part of it, and the place entitled to the greatest reverence, is occupied by a private vestibule.
There are many considerations which influence me, namely, this, that the temple of Tellus is put particularly under my care; and that he who took away that armoury said that my house, which was declared free by the decision of the pontiffs, had been adjudged to his brother.
I am influenced also at this time of dearness of provisions, of barrenness of the lands, and of scarcity of the crops, by the reverence due to Tellus; and all the more, because, on account of this same prodigy, an atonement is said to be due to Tellus.
Perhaps we are speaking of old stones; although, if this is not laid down in the civil law, still by the law of nature and the common rights of nations the principle has been established, that mortals cannot acquire a prescriptive right to anything as against the immortal gods.
But we will pass over all things of old date.
Shall we also pass over those things which are done at the present time; which we see ourselves?
Who knows not that Lucius Piso at this very time has been removing a great and most holy chapel of Diana on the Coeliculan hill?
Men who live close to that spot are in court.
There are many even belonging to this body who once a year have regularly performed the sacrifices of their family in that very chapel in their appointed place.
And do we ask what places the immortal gods are regretting, what it is they are meaning, of what it is that they are speaking?
Are we ignorant that some most holy chapels were undermined, blocked up, knocked down, and defiled in the most unseemly possible manner by Sextus Serranus?
Were you able to render my house the property of the gods?
With what feelings?
You have lost all feeling.
With what hand?
With that with which you pulled it down.
With what voice?
With that with which you ordered it to be set on fire.
By what law?
By one which you did not venture to propose even at the time when you were doing everything with impunity.
With what cushion?
That which you polluted with your adulteries.
With what image?
That which you took off from a harlot's tomb and placed on the monument of a general.
What has my house which is connected with anything religious except that it touches the wall of an impious and sacrilegious man?
Therefore that none of my people may be able unintentionally to look into your house I will raise the roof higher not in order that I may look down upon you, but that you may not be able to see that city which you were desirous to destroy.
But let us now examine the rest of the clauses of the answers of the soothsayers.
"That ambassadors have been slain contrary to all divine and human law."
What is this?
I see here a mention of the deputies from Alexandria; and I cannot refute it.
For my feelings are, that the privileges of ambassadors are not only fenced round by human protection, but are also guarded by divine laws.
But I ask of that man, who, as tribune, filled the forum with judges whom he took out of the prisons, by whose will every dagger is now guided and every cup of poison dispensed, who has made a regular bargain with Hermarchus of Chios, whether he is at all aware that one most active adversary of Hermarchus, of the name of Theodosius, having been sent as ambassador to the senate from a free city, was assassinated with a dagger?
and I know to a certainty that that cannot have appeared less scandalous to the immortal gods than the case of the Alexandrians.
Nor am I now attributing every action of this sort to you alone.
There would be greater hope of safety if there were no other wicked man but you; but there are more, and on this account you feel more confidence, and we almost distrust the protection of the law.
Who is there who is not aware that Plato, a man of high character and high rank in his own country, came from Orestis, which is a free part of Macedonia, to Thessalonica, as an ambassador to our general, as he called himself?
and this great general of ours, being angry at not being able to extort money from him, threw him into prison, and sent his own physician to him, who in a most infamous and barbarous manner cut the veins of an ambassador, an ally, a friend, and a freeman.
He did not wish his own forces to be made bloody by crime; but he polluted the name of the Roman people with such guilt that it cannot be expiated by any means but his own punishment.
What sort of executioner must we think that this man has in his train, when he uses even his physicians not to procure health but to inflict death?
But let us read what follows.
That good faith and oaths have been disregarded.
What this means by itself, I cannot easily explain; but from that which follows, I suspect that it refers to the manifest perjury of your judges, from whom, some time ago, the money which they had received would have been taken away, if they had not entreated the protection of the senate.
And this is the reason why I imagine that they are the persons alluded to, because I lay it down as a fact that that is the most remarkable and notorious perjury ever committed in this city and yet that you yourself are not threatened with the punishment of perjury by those men with whom you conspired.
And I see that in the answers of the soothsayers this is added: "But the ancient and secret sacrifices have been performed with less than due diligence and have been polluted."
Are they the soothsayers who say this or the gods of our country and our household gods?
I suppose there are many persons to whom a suspicion of this guilt attaches;
who but this one man?
Is it mentioned obscurely what sacrifices have been polluted?
What can be expressed in a plainer, more dignified or more solemn manner?
Ancient and secret.
I say that Lentulus, a dignified and eloquent orator, did not when he was accusing you, make use of any expressions more frequently than these which now are extracted from the Etruscan books and turned against and applied to you.
In truth what sacrifice is there so ancient as this, which we have received from the kings and which is contemporary with the city itself?
But what is so secret as that which excludes not only all curious eyes but even all accidental ones?
Which not only no wickedness, but which even no unintentional chance can penetrate?
That sacrifice no one, ever since the world began, has ever profaned, no one has ever approached no one has ever disregarded no man has ever thought of beholding without horror before Publius Clodius.
It is performed by the vestal virgins; it is performed on behalf of the Roman people; it is performed in the house of a supreme magistrate; it is performed with incredible solemnity; it is performed to that goddess whose very name it is not lawful for men to know, and whom that fellow calls Good, because she has pardoned him such enormous wickedness .
She has not pardoned you, believe me.
No; unless, perchance, you think yourself pardoned because the judges dismissed you after they had squeezed and drained everything out of you, acquitted by their decision, condemned by all the rest of the citizens; or because you have not been deprived of your eyes, as is, according to the common belief the consequence of such impiety.
For what man ever intentionally beheld those sacred rites before you, so as to enable any one to know what punishment followed that guilt?
Could the blindness of your eyes be a greater injury to you than that blindness of your lust?
Do not even you feel that those winking eyes of your ancestor were more desirable for you than these glowing eyes of your sister?
But, if you observe carefully, you will see that though you have as yet escaped the punishment of men, you have not escaped that of the gods.
Men have defended you in a most shameful affair; men have praised you though most infamous and most guilty;
men, for a bribe, have acquitted you by their decision, though you all but confessed your guilt; men have felt no indignation at the injuries inflicted on themselves by your lust; men have supplied you with arms, some wishing them to be used against me, and others afterwards intending them to he employed against that invincible citizen.
I will quite admit all the kindnesses which men have shown you, and that you need not wish for greater.
But what greater punishment can be inflicted on man by the immortal gods than frenzy and madness?
unless, perhaps, you think that those persons, whom in tragedies you see tortured and destroyed by wounds and agony of body, are enduring a more terrible form of the wrath of the immortal gods than those who are brought on the stage in a state of insanity.
Those howlings and groans of Philoctetes are not so pitiable (sad though they be) as that exultation of Athamas, or that dream of those who have slain their mother.
You, when you are uttering your frantic speeches to the assembly when you are destroying the houses of the citizens when you are driving virtuous men from the forum with stones when you are hurling burning firebrands at your neighbours' houses when you are setting fire to holy temples when you are stirring up the slaves when you are throwing the sacred rites and games into confusion when you see no difference between your wife and your sister when you do not perceive whose bed it is that you enter when you go ranting and raging about you are then suffering that punishment which is the only one appointed by the immortal gods for the wickedness of men.
For the infirmity of our bodies is of itself liable to many accidents; moreover, the body itself is often destroyed by some very trivial cause; and the darts of the gods are fixed in the minds of impious men.
Wherefore you are more miserable while you are hurried into every sort of wickedness by your eyes, than you would be if you had no eyes at all.
But since enough has been said of all these offences which the soothsayers say have been committed, let us see now what these same soothsayers say that we are being warned of at this time by the immortal gods.
They warn us "to take care that bloodshed and danger be not brought upon the senators and chief men of the state, through the discord and dissension of the nobles; and that our senators do not become disheartened from being deprived of support by which the provinces may fall under the power of a single master, and our armies be defeated, and a great loss of power ensue."
All these are the words of the soothsayers, I am not adding any thing of my own.
Who then of the nobles is it who is causing this discord?
The same man and that not by any force of his own genius or wisdom but by some blundering of ours which he for it was not very much concealed easily perceived.
For this consideration makes the present distress of the republic the more shameful, that even by him it is not afflicted in such a way that it may seem to fall like a brave man in battle, having received honourable wounds in front from a gallant foe.
Tiberius Gracchus overturned the constitution of the state, a man of such great force of character, and eloquence, and dignity, that he fell short in no respect of the surpassing and eminent virtue of his father, and of his grandfather, Africanus, except in the fact of his revolting from the senate.
Caius Gracchus followed in his steps.
How great was his genius! how great his energy! how impetuous his eloquence!
so that all men grieved that all those good qualities and accomplishments were not joined to a better disposition and to better intentions.
Lucius Saturninus himself was so furious and almost insane a man, that he was an admirable leader, perfect in exciting and inflaming the minds of the ignorant.
For why should I speak of Publius Sulpicius?
whose dignity, and sweetness, and emphatic conciseness in speaking was so great that he was able by his oratory to lead even wise men into error, and virtuous men into pernicious sentiments.
To be battling with these men, and to be duly struggling with them for the safety of the country, was a very annoying thing to those men who were at that time the governors of the republic, but still that annoyance had a certain sort of dignity in it.
But as for this man, about whom I am now saying so much, O ye immortal gods!
what is he? what is his influence? what is there about him to give so great a city, if it does fall, (may the gods avert the omen!) the comfort of at least seeming to have been overthrown by a man?
a fellow who, from the moment of his father's death, made his tender age subservient to the lusts of wealthy buffoons; when he had satiated their licentiousness, then he turned to the domestic seduction of his own sister;
then, when he had become a man, he devoted himself to the concerns of a province, and to military affairs, and suffered insults from the pirates;
he satisfied the lusts even of Cilicians and barbarians: afterwards, having in a most wicked manner tampered with the army of Lucius Lucullus, he fled from thence, and at Rome, the moment of his arrival there, he began to compound with his own relations not to prosecute them, and received money from Catiline to prevaricate in the most shameless manner.
From thence he went into Gaul with Murena; in which province he forged wills of dead people, murdered wards, and made bargains and partnerships or wickedness with many.
When he returned from Gaul, he appropriated to himself all that most fruitful and abundant source of gain which is derived from the Campus Martius, in such a manner that he (a man wholly devoted to the people!) cheated the people in a most scandalous manner, and also (merciful man that he is!) put the canvassers of the different tribes to death at his own house in the most cruel manner.
Then came his quaestorship, so fatal to the republic, to our sacrifices, to our religions observances, to your authority, and to the public courts of justice; in which he insulted gods and men, virtue, modesty, the authority of the senate, every right both human and divine, and the laws and the tribunals of the country.
And this was his first step; this (alas for the miserable times and for our senseless discords!) was the first step of Publius Clodius towards the conduct of the affairs of the republic; this was the path by which he first began to approach and mount up to his present boast of being a friend of the people.
For the unpopularity arising from the treaty at Numantia, at the making of which he had been present as quaestor to Caius Mancinus the consul, and the severity displayed by the senate in repudiating that treaty, were a constant source of grief and fear to Tiberius Gracchus; and that circumstance alienated him, a brave and illustrious man, from the wisdom of the senators.
And Caius Gracchus was excited by the death of his brother, by affection for him, by indignation, and by the greatness of his own mind, to seek to exact vengeance for the slaughter of a member of his family.
We know that Saturninus was led to confess himself a friend of the people out of indignation, because at a time of great dearness of provisions, the senate removed him while he was quaestor from the superintendence of the grain market which belonged to him by virtue of his office, and appointed Marcus Scaurus to manage that business.
And it was the breeze of popularity which carried Sulpicius further than he intended, after he had set out in a good cause, and had resisted Caius Julius when seeking to obtain the consulship contrary to the laws.
All these men had a reason, not an adequate one, indeed, (for no one can have an adequate reason for proving a bad citizen to the republic,) but still they had a serious reason, and one connected with some indignation of mind not unbecoming to a man.
Publius Clodius came out as a popular character from saffron gowns and turbans, and woman's slippers, and purple bands, and stomachers, and singing, and iniquity, and adultery.
If the women had not caught him in this dress, if he had not been allowed to escape by the indulgence of the maid servants, from a place which it was impious for him to enter, the Roman people would have lost their devoted friend, the republic would have been deprived of so energetic a citizen.
It is in consequence of this insane conduct, amid our dissensions, for which we are by these recent prodigies admonished by the immortal gods, that one of the patricians has been taken from their number to be made a tribune of the people, in direct violation of the laws.
That which, the year before, his brother Metellus and the senate, which even then was unanimous, had refused, and in the most rigorous manner rejected with one voice and one mind, Cnaeus Pompeius being the first to declare his opinion; (so greatly, after the dissensions of the nobles of which we are now reminded, were circumstances disturbed and altered;) that which his brother when consul opposed being done, which his kinsman and companion, a most illustrious man, who had refused to speak in his favour when he was accused, had utterly prevented, was now effected for him, owing to the dissensions of the nobles, by that man as consul, who, of all others, was bound to be his greatest enemy; and he said that he had done it by the advice of that man whose authority no one could repent having followed.
A most shameful and grievous firebrand was thrown into the republic.
Your authority was aimed at; and the dignity of the most honourable orders in the city, and the unanimity of all virtuous men, and in short, the entire constitution of the state.
For these things were certainly attacked when that flame kindled at that time was directed against me, who had been the principal investigator of these matters.
I bore the brunt of the attack, and I alone suffered on behalf of my country; but still I bore it so that you, while you were surrounded by the same flames, saw me wounded first and burning, as it were, in your defence.
The dissensions were not appeased; but the unpopularity of those men, by whom we thought that our cause was espoused, even increased.
So, after a time, the very same men being the movers, and Pompeius the chief man, who roused Italy willing to be roused, and the Roman people which regretted me, and you who demanded me back, to take measures for my safety, employing not only his authority but even his prayers, I was restored.
Let there be an end of discord, let us at last find rest from our long dissensions.
No, that pest will not allow it; he summons these assemblies, he throws everything into confusion and disorder, selling himself sometimes to one party, sometimes to another; and yet not in such a manner that any one thinks himself the more praiseworthy for being praised by him; though at the same time they are glad that those whom they do not like, are abused by him.
And I do not marvel at this fellow; for what else can he do?
I do marvel at those wise and respectable men; in the first place, that they so easily allow any illustrious man who has deserved well of the republic to be attacked by the voice of a most profligate man; in the second place, that they think, (it would be a most disastrous thing for themselves if the fact were so,) that the real glory and dignity of any one can be impaired by the abuse of an abandoned and worthless man; and lastly, that they do not see, what however, they do seem to me to have some suspicion of, that those frantic and desultory attacks of his may some day or other be turned against themselves.
And it is owing to this undue alienation of some persons from others that those arrows now stick in the republic which, as long as they stuck in me alone, I bore, with pain, indeed, but still not as thinking them of any great importance.
Could that fellow, if he had not first given himself up to those men whose minds he thought were alienated from your authority, if he had not, admirable authority that he is! extolled them to the skies with his panegyric, if he had not threatened that he would let loose the army of Caius Caesar (though in that he spoke falsely, but no one contradicted him,) that he would, I say set on that army with hostile standards against the senate-house if he had not cried out that he was doing what he was by the assistance of Cnaeus Pompeius, and at the instigation of Marcus Crassus, if he had not declared (the only word of truth that he spoke) that the consuls had united their cause with him;
could he, I say, ever have been so cruel an enemy to me or so wicked a disturber of the republic?
After that, when he saw you recovering your breath after your fear of bloodshed, when he saw your authority rising again above the waves of that slavery, and the recollection of, and regret for me, getting more vivid, then he began on a sudden to sell himself to you, though with the most treacherous design.
then he began to say, both here in this house and in the assemblies of the people, that the Sullan laws had been passed in opposition to the auspices; among which laws was that lex curiata on which the whole of his tribuneship depended, though he was too frantic to see that.
He brought forward that most fearless man Marcus Bibulus.
He asked him whether he had not always been observing the heavens when Caius Caesar was carrying those laws?
He replied, that he always had been observing them at that time.
He asked the augurs whether laws which had been passed under these circumstances had been duly passed?
They said, such a proceeding was irregular.
Some people, virtuous men, and men who had done great service to me, began to extol him; utterly ignorant I imagine, of the lengths to which his madness could carry him.
He proceeded further.
He began to inveigh against Cnaeus Pompeius, the originator, as he was accustomed to boast, of all his designs.
He gained great popularity in the people's eyes.
But then, when he had become elated by the hope that he might be able as he had by his abominable wickedness crushed, as he fancied him who, though in the garb of peace, had proved the suppressor of domestic war to put down also that great man who had been the conqueror of our foreign wars and foreign enemies, then was seized in the temple of Castor that wicked dagger which was nearly the destroyer of this empire.
Then he, against whom no enemy's city had ever long continued shut he, who had always broken through all straits, trampled on all heights, crushed, by his energy and valour, the opposing weapons of every foe, was himself besieged at home; and, by the counsels which he adopted, relieved me from the reproaches cast on my timidity by some ignorant people.
For if it was miserable rather than disgraceful to Cnaeus Pompeius, that bravest of all men who have ever been born, not to be able to go abroad in the sight of men, and to be secluded from all public places, as long as that fellow was tribune of the people, and to put up with his threats, when he said in the public assembly that he wished to build a second piazza in Carinae, to correspond to the one on the Palatine Hill; certainly, for me to leave my house was grievous as far as my own private grief was concerned, but glorious if you look only at the interests of the republic.
You see, then, that this fellow, when, as far as his own efforts went, he had been long since overthrown and crushed, was aroused again by the mischievous discords of the nobles; and the first beginnings of his fury were upheld by those who at that time appeared alienated from you.
It is by these detractors and enemies that the remainder of the acts of his tribuneship have been defended, even since that tribuneship was over.
They are the men who resisted that pest being removed from the republic; they prevented his being prosecuted; they resisted his being reduced to the condition of a private citizen.
Is it possible that any virtuous men could have cherished in their bosom and have taken pleasure in, that poisonous and deadly viper?
By what bribe were they cajoled?
I wish, say they, that there should be some one in the assembly to disparage Pompeius.
Can he disparage him by his abuse?
I wish that that great man, who has contributed so greatly to my safety, may receive what I say in the same spirit as I say it.
At all events, I will say what I feel.
I declare to God, that there was no time that fellow appeared to be detracting so much from his exceeding dignity as when he was extolling him with the most extravagant praises.
Was Caius Marius, I pray you, more illustrious when Caius Glaucia was praising him, or when he became angry afterwards and abused him?
Or, was this madman, who has been so long rushing headlong on punishment and destruction, more foul-mouthed and shameless when accusing Pompeius than he had been when reviling the whole senate?
But I do marvel that though the former conduct may have been pleasing to angry men, the other course should not have been odious to such good citizens.
But, lest this should any longer please excellent men, let them just read this harangue of his, of which I speak: in which, shall I say, he extols, or rather debases Pompeius?
Undoubtedly he extols him, and says, that he is the only man in the city worthy of the glory of this empire; and hints that he is an exceedingly great friend of his, and that they are entirely reconciled.
And although I do not exactly know what he means yet I am sure that, if he were a friend to Pompeius, he would not praise him.
For, if he were his greatest enemy, what could he do more to diminish his credit?
Let those, who were glad that he was an enemy to Cnaeus Pompeius, and who, on that account winked at his numerous and enormous crimes, and who sometimes even accompanied his unbridled and furious acts of frenzy with their applause, observe how quickly he has turned round.
For now he is praising him; he is inveighing against those men to whom he previously sold himself.
What do you suppose he will do if a door to reconciliation with him should become really open to him, when he is so eager to spread a belief in such a reconciliation?
What other dissensions among the nobles can I suppose are pointed out by the immortal gods?
For by this expression Publius Clodius is surely not meant nor any one of his gang or of his counselors.
The Etruscan books have certain names which may fit some of that class of citizens.
"Worthless men, rejected candidates," as you shall presently hear, they call them, whose minds and estates are ruined, and utterly alienated from the general welfare.
Wherefore when the immortal gods warn us of the discords of the nobles, they speak of the dissensions between illustrious citizens who have deserved well of the republic.
When they predict danger and slaughter to the chief men, they leave Clodius safe enough, a man who is as far from the chief men as he is from virtuous or holy men.
It is for you and for your safety, O most illustrious and most virtuous citizens, that they see that it behoves them to consult and to provide.
Slaughter of the chief men is indicated; that is added which must inevitably follow the death of the nobles.
We are warned to take care that the republic does not fall under the absolute dominion of a single individual.
And even if we were not led to this fear by the warning of the gods, still we ourselves, of our own accord, by our own senses and conjectures, should he forced to entertain it.
For there is not usually any other termination to dissensions between eminent and powerful men, except either universal destruction, or the domination of the victorious party, or regal power.
Lucius Sulla, a most noble and gallant consul, quarreled with Caius Marius, a most illustrious citizen.
Each of these men, when defeated, fell so completely that the conqueror became a king.
Cinna quarreled with his colleague Octavius.
To each of these men prosperity gave kingly power, and adversity brought death.
The same Sulla became victorious a second time.
And that time, beyond all question, he exercised regal power, though he re-established the republic.
There is at this moment a hatred not concealed but implanted deeply, and burnt as it were into their minds, subsisting between men of the very highest rank.
The chief men of the state are at variance.
Every occasion is eagerly caught at.
That party which is not so powerful as the other is nevertheless waiting for some change of fortune and for some favourable opportunity.
That party which without dispute is the more powerful, is still perhaps at times afraid of the designs and opinions of its enemies.
Let this discord be which are foreshown by these prodigies will be banished from the state.
In a moment that serpent which is at present lurking about here will emerge and be brought to light, and will be strangled, and crushed, and die.
For the soothsayers warn us to take care that the republic is not injured by secret designs.
What designs are more secret than those of that man who dared to say in the public assembly that a suspension of the courts of justice ought to be proclaimed; that the jurisdiction of the judges ought to be interrupted, and the treasury shut and all trials put an end to?
Unless perhaps you think that all this confusion and overthrow of the constitution could occur to him all on a sudden, while in the rostrum, and that he was not speaking after mature deliberation.
The man is full of wine, lust, and sleep, full of the most inconsiderate and insane rashness; but still it was in his nocturnal vigils, and in a numerous company, that that suspension of justice was planned and concocted.
Remember, O conscript fathers, that your ears were being experimented on by that expression, and that a most mischievous road was being made to them by accustoming you to hear it.
These words follow: "That more honour must not he given to worthless citizens and rejected candidates."
Let us see who are the rejected candidates; for I will show you afterwards who are the worthless citizens.
But still all men must allow that this expression suits that man above all other who is beyond all question the most worthless of all mortals.
Who then, are the rejected candidates?
Not, I imagine, they who some time or other have failed to attain some honour more by the fault of the city than by their own.
For that is a thing which has frequently happened to many most excellent citizens and most honourable men.
Those are the rejected candidates meant, whom, when they were proceeding to the most violent measures, when they were preparing exhibitions of gladiators contrary to the laws, when they were bribing in the most open manner, not only strangers, but even their own relations, their neighbours, the men of their own tribe, towns-people and countrymen, all rejected.
We are warned not to confer any additional honours on these men.
It ought to be a very acceptable admonition that they give us; but still the Roman people itself, of its own accord, without any warning on the part of the soothsayers, has provided against this evil.
O you worthless men, beware; and there is a great multitude of you; but still this man is the leader and chief of the whole band.
In truth, if any poet of splendid genius were to wish to bring on the stage one most worthless man, deformed with all sorts of imaginary vices collected from all quarters, he would not, I pledge myself, be able to discover one disgraceful quality which did not exist in this man, and he would pass over many which are deeply implanted and firmly rooted in him.
In the first place nature attaches us to our parents, and to the immortal gods, and to our country.
For at one and the same time we are brought forth to the light, and we are strengthened so as to grow by the breath of heaven which we feel around us, and we are established in a certain abode as citizens and free men.
That fellow has jumbled in confusion the name of his parents, and his family sacrifices, and the memory of his family, and his family itself, by the assumption of the name of Fonteius.
He has with unpardonable wickedness thrown into confusion the fires of the gods, their thrones, and tables, their secret hearths in the inmost recesses of the house, and sacrifices which were previously secret, and not only unseen by men, but even unheard-of by them; and besides all this he has set fire to the temple of those goddesses by whose aid people come to bring assistance in the case of other fires.
Why should I mention his country?
when in the first place by violence and arms, and dread of personal danger, he drove away from the city and from all the protection afforded him by his country that citizen whom you had decided over and over again to have been the saviour of his country.
In the second place, having overthrown the companion of the senate, as I have always said, but its leader as he used to call him, he by violence, bloodshed, and conflagration, threw into confusion the senate itself, the mainstay of the general safety and of the public good sense; he abolished two laws, the Aelian and Fufian laws, which were of especial advantage to the state; he extinguished the censorship; he took away the power of intercession; he abolished the auspices; he armed the consuls, the companions of his wickedness, with the treasury, and provinces, and an army; he sold the kings who were in existence, and he called men kings who were not so; he drove Cnaeus Pompeius to his house with violence and arms; he overthrew the monuments of our generals; he threw down the houses of his enemies; he inscribed his own name on your monuments.
The wicked deeds which have been done by him to the injury of his country are innumerable.
Why need I tell what he has done to individual citizens, whom he has slain? Why need I count up the allies whom he has plundered? or the generals whom he has betrayed? or the armies with which he has tampered?
Why need I mention what enormous wickednesses they are which he has been guilty of towards himself, and towards his own relations?
Who ever showed less mercy to the camp of an enemy than he has shown to every part of his own person?
What ship in a public river was ever so open to all men as his youth was?
What spendthrifts ever lived in so unrestrained a manner with prostitutes as he did with his own sisters?
In short what enormous Charybdis could the poets ever describe or ever imagine, capable of swallowing down such whirlpools as the plunder of the Byzantines and Brogitari which that fellow has sucked down?
or what Scylla with such conspicuous and hungry hounds as the Gellii, and Clodii, and Titii with which you see that fellow devouring the rostrum itself?
Wherefore, and that is the last sentence in the answers of the soothsayers, "Beware that the constitution of the republic be not changed."
In truth it is only with difficulty, even if we prop it up on all sides, that the constitution, already undermined and resting on all our shoulders, will be able to be kept together.
This state was once so firm and so vigorous that it could withstand the indifference of the senate, or even the assaults of the citizens.
Now it cannot.
There is no treasury.
Those who have contracted for the revenues do not enjoy them; the authority of the chief men has fallen; the agreement between the different orders of the state is torn asunder; the courts of justice are destroyed; the votes are all arranged and divided so as to be under the power of a few; the courage of the virtuous citizens, formerly ready at a nod from our order, exists no longer.
Henceforth in vain will you look for a citizen who will expose himself to unpopularity for the welfare of his country.
We can then preserve even this state of things which now exists, such as it is, by no other means than by unanimity; for although we may become better off, that cannot even be hoped for as long as he is unpunished.
And if we are to be worse off than we are, there is but one step slower, that of death or slavery.
And the immortal gods themselves warn us against allowing ourselves to be thrust down into that abyss, since all human counsels have long since failed.
And I, O conscript fathers, should not have undertaken this speech, so melancholy and so serious; not but that owing to the honours conferred on me by the Roman people, and to the numberless distinctions which you have heaped upon me, I am both bound and able to support this character and to play this part; but still, when every one else was silent, I should willingly have remained silent too.
All this speech which I have made has not proceeded from my authority, but from my regard for the general religion.
My words have, perhaps, been too many, but the whole sentiment has proceeded from the soothsayers.
And either you ought never to have referred the prodigies which have been reported to you to them at all, or else you must be influenced by their answers.
But if other more ordinary and more trifling occurrences have often influenced us, shall not the express voice of the immortal gods influence every one's mind?
Do not think that really possible, which you often see in plays, that some god descending from heaven can approach the assemblies of men, and abide on earth, and converse with men.
Consider the description of noise which the Latins have reported.
Remember that prodigy also, which has not as yet been formally reported, that at almost the same time a terrible earthquake is said to have taken place in the Picenian district, at Potentia, with many other terrible circumstances; these things which we foresee you will fear as impending over the city.
In truth, this ought almost to be considered as the voice and speech of the immortal gods, when the world itself and the air and the earth tremble with a certain unusual agitation, and prophecy to us with an unprecedented and incredible sound.
On this emergency we must appoint atonements and prayers as we are ordered;
but it is easy to address prayers to those beings who of their own accord point out to us the path of safety.
Our own internal quarrels and dissensions must be terminated by ourselves.
If any one in times past, O judges, was used to wonder what was the reason why in a republic of such power, and in an empire of such dignity, there were not found any great number of citizens endowed with so fearless and magnanimous a spirit as to dare to expose themselves and their personal safety to danger on behalf of the constitution of the state and of the general liberty; from henceforward he must wonder if he ever sees any virtuous or intrepid citizens, rather than if he occasionally finds one timid, and caring more for his own interests than for those of the republic.
For without calling to mind and considering the case of each separate individual, you can see at one survey those men who joined the senate and all virtuous citizens in raising up our afflicted country, and delivering it from a horde of domestic robbers, now with sad countenances and mourning garments struggling as defendants for their freedom, for their characters, for their rights as citizens, for their fortunes, and for their children; and those who have polluted, and attacked, and thrown into confusion, and overturned all divine and human laws, going about the city merry and joyful, and, while they are without any provocation, contriving danger for the bravest and best of the citizens, in no fear whatever for themselves.
And though there is much that is scandalous in such a state of things, yet is there nothing more intolerable than that they now seek to employ not their bands of robbers, not men desperate through want and wickedness, but you yourselves, the best men in the city, for the purpose of bringing us and other most virtuous men into danger.
And they now think that, as they were unable to destroy them by stones, and swords, and firebrands, by violence, and personal force, and armed bands, they will be able to effect their purpose through the instrumentality of your authority, your integrity, and your judicial decisions.
But, O judges, since I am compelled now to exert that voice in order to ward off danger from them, which I had hoped to be able to devote to returning thanks to, and to commemorating the kindness of those men who have conferred the greatest services on me, I entreat you to allow that voice to be useful to them to whose exertions it is owing that it has been restored at all to myself, and to you and to the Roman people.
And although the case of Publius Sestius has been summed up by Quintus Hortensius, that most illustrious and most eloquent man; and though nothing has been omitted by him which he could possibly urge either in the way of complaint over the condition of the republic, or of argument for the defendant; still I will come forward also to speak for him, lest my exertions in defence should appear to be wanting to that man to whom it is owing that they are not wanting to every one of the citizens.
And I consider, O judges, that in this case, and now speaking as I am at the close of it, the part which belongs to me is to argue the matter on grounds of affection, rather than to defend my client by an appeal to the strict law; to employ complaints rather than eloquence, and to display my grief rather than my ability.
And, therefore, if I plead with more vehemence or more freedom than those who have spoken before me, I beg of you to listen to my speech with much indulgence, and to make all the allowance for it that you think is due to pious grief and just indignation.
For no man's grief can be more intimately connected with his duty than this present grief of mine, being caused as it is by the peril of a man who has done me the greatest possible services.
Nor is any indignation more praiseworthy than that with which I am inflamed by the wickedness of those men, who have thought it their business to declare war against all the defenders of my safety.
But since his other counsel have spoken of each separate charge, I will speak of the entire state of the case as affecting Publius Sestius of his conduct throughout his life of his natural disposition, of his habits, of his incredible affection for all good men, of his zeal for the preservation of the general safety and tranquillity; and I will endeavour if it be only possible for me to succeed to prevent anything, in all this miscellaneous and general defence, from appearing omitted by me which has any connection either with this investigation before you, or with the defendant, or with the republic.
And since the tribuneship of Publius Sestius was placed by fortune itself in the most critical period of the state, and amid the ruins of the overthrown and prostrate republic, I will not approach those most important and serious topics before I have first shown you by what beginnings, and on what foundations, the great glory was built up which he gained under the most trying circumstances.
Publius Sestius, O judges, was born (as most of you know) of a wise and conscientious and strict father, who, after he had been appointed as the first tribune of the people among a number of most noble men and in a prosperous time of the republic, was not so eager to obtain the other honours of the state as to seem worthy of them.
By the advice of that father, he married the daughter of a most honourable and thoroughly tried man Caius Albinus by whom he had this boy whom you see here, and a daughter who is now married.
My client was so highly esteemed by these two men of the highest class of old-fashioned virtue, that he was beyond all things beloved by and agreeable to both of them.
The death of his daughter took away from Albinus the name of his father-in-law, but it did not take away the affection and good-will engendered by that connection.
And to this very day he is very fond of him, as you may judge by his constant attendance here, and by his anxiety for him, and by his frequent solicitations to you on his behalf.
He married a second wife, while his father was still alive, the daughter of a most virtuous but most unfortunate man, Caius Scipio.
And with respect to this man, the piety of Publius was shown in a most remarkable way, and one acceptable to all men, for he immediately went to Massilia to see and comfort his father-in-law, cast out as he was by the waves of the republic, lying in a foreign land, a man who ought to have stood in the footsteps of his ancestors.
And he conducted his daughter to him, in order to induce him, by that unexpected sight and embrace, to lay aside, if not all, at least some part of his sorrow;
and as long as he lived he supported with the most unceasing attentions the sorrow of the father and the desolate condition of his daughter.
I might here say a great deal about his liberality, his attention to his domestic duties, his conduct as military tribune, and his great moderation in his province in the discharge of the duty of that magistracy; but I keep always in my view the dignity of the republic, which summons me to the consideration of herself, and exhorts me to pass over these minor points.
My client, O judges, was indeed, by lot the quaestor of Caius Antonius, my colleague, but by his sharing in all my counsels he was in effect mine.
I am prevented by scruples concerning the pledge of confidence, as I interpret it, under which such duties are performed, from explaining to you how much information he brought to me, and what great foresight he displayed.
And of Antonius I will only say this one thing; that in that time of exceeding fear and danger to the state, he never once attempted either to remove by any denial or to allay by any concealment the general apprehensions of all men, or the especial suspicion conceived by some persons with respect to himself.
And if you were accustomed with truth, while I was occupied in supporting and restraining that colleague of mine, to praise my indulgence to him, united as it was with the greatest watchfulness over the interests of the republic, almost equal praise ought to be given to Publius Sestius, who kept such a watch on his own consul that he seemed to him to be a good quaestor, and to all of you to be a most excellent citizen.
Moreover, when that conspiracy had burst forth from its hiding place and from darkness, and stalked about in arms through the city, he came with the army to Capua; which city we suspected, on account of its exceeding resources and advantages in time of war, was likely to have attempts made on it by that impious and wicked band.
And he drove Marcus Aulanus, a military tribune devoted to Antonius, headlong out of Capua; a profligate man, and one who without much disguise had mixed in the intrigues of the conspiracy at Pisaurum, and in other parts of the Gallic territory.
He also took care to get rid of Caius Marcellus out of that city, after he had not only come to Capua, but, as if from a fondness for warlike arms, had frequently visited a very numerous troop of gladiators.
On which account that illustrious body of Roman settlers which is at Capua, which, on account of the way in which I preserved the safety of that city during my consulship, has adopted me as their only patron, returned the greatest thanks to this Publius Sestius, when he was at my house; and at this very time those same men, changing only their name, and appearing as colonists, and decurions, most gallant and virtuous men that they are! come forward to give evidence, and to declare the services done to them by Publius Sestius, and to inform you of their public vote according to which they entreat you to protect him from danger.
Read, I beg, O Publius Sestius, what the decurions of Capua decreed, in order that your childish voice may be able to give some hint to our adversaries what it appears likely to be able to do when it has acquired strength.
The decree of the decurions is read.
I am not having a decree read which has been dictated by any obligations of neighbourhood, or clientship, or relation of public hospitality, or which was passed because of a canvass for it, or because of the recommendation of some powerful man.
But I am reciting to you the expression of a recollection of dangers which have been passed through, the declaration of a most honourable service done to a people, a present return of kindness, and a testimony of past events.
And at that very time when Sestius had released Capua from fear, and the senate and all good men, by the detection and crushing of all domestic enemies, had, under my guidance, delivered the city from the greatest dangers, I sent letters to summon him from Capua with that army which he had at that time with him.
And the moment he had read the letters, he flew to the city with inconceivable rapidity.
And in order that you may thoroughly call to mind the atrocity of those times, listen to the letters, and stir up your memories to a contemplation of the time that is gone by.
The letters of Cicero, the consul, are read.
By this arrival of Publius Sestius, the attacks and attempts of the new tribunes of the people, who then, in the last days of my consulship, were endeavouring to give me trouble on account of the deeds which I had performed, and all the over violent designs of the conspiracy, were checked.
And after it was perceived that while Cato, as tribune of the people, a most fearless and excellent citizen, defended the republic, the senate and the Roman people by themselves, without any assistance from the military, could easily uphold both their own majesty and the dignity of those men who had defended the general safety at their own personal risk, Sestius with that army of his followed Antonius with the greatest possible rapidity.
Here why need I mention by what conduct he stirred up the consul to act with energy? or how many motives for exertion he suggested to that man, desirous, perhaps, of victory, but still too much afraid of the common dangers and chances of warfare and of battle?
That would be a very long story; but thus much I will say briefly.
If the courage of Marcus Petreius had not been most admirable; if his virtue in state affairs had not been faultless; if his influence among the soldiers had not been overpowering; if his experience in military affairs had not been most surprising; and if, above all, Publius Sestius had not cooperated with him in exciting, encouraging, reproving, and spurring on Antonius, winter would have overtaken them before the end of that war, and Catiline, when he had emerged from those frosts and snows of the Apennines, and, having the whole summer before him, had begun to plunder the roads of Italy and the folds of the shepherds, would never have been destroyed without enormous bloodshed, and most miserable devastation extending over the whole of Italy.
These then were the feelings which Publius Sestius brought to his tribuneship that I may forbear to speak of his quaestorship, and come at last to things nearer to ourselves.
Although I must not omit to speak of that singular integrity of his in the province of which I lately saw traces in Macedonia, not lightly imprinted to celebrate something for a short time, but fixed in the everlasting recollection of that province.
But, however, we will pass over all these things, though not with out turning back and fixing one last look upon them.
Let us come with eager zeal and rapid course to his tribuneship, since that has been for some time inviting us to contemplate it, and since it occupies a large portion of my speech.
And that tribuneship has already been spoken of by Quintus Hortensius in such a way that his speech not only appears to contain a complete defence to every count of the accusation, but would even be worth recollecting as laying down admirable rules for the principles and system on which a man ought to proceed in discharging the duties of a public office.
But I was, perhaps, a little more intemperate just now than I should have been.
Wherefore, that you may not wonder at my having paid you this compliment of putting questions to you, whom no one thinks worthy of being spoken to or visited, whom no one thinks deserving of a vote, or of the rights of a citizen, or even of the light of life; know that no motive would have induced me to do so, except that of repressing that ferocity of yours, and crushing your audacity, and checking your loquacity by entangling it in the few questions I should put to you.
In truth, you ought, O Vatinius, even if you had become suspected by Publius Sestius undeservedly, still to pardon me, if, on the occasion of such great danger to a man who has done me such great services, I had yielded to the consideration of what his necessities required, and what his inclination deserved of me.
But you unintentionally showed a few moments ago that you spoke falsely in the evidence which you gave yesterday, when you asserted that you had never had the least conversation with Albinovanus, not only about the prosecution of Sestius, but about anything whatever; and yet you said just now that Titus Claudius had been in communication with you, and had asked your advice with respect to the conduct of the prosecution against Sestius, and that Albinovanus, who you had said before was hardly known to you, had come to your house, and had held a long conversation with you.
And lastly, you said that you had given to Albinovanus the written harangues of Publius Sestius, which he had never had any knowledge of, and did not know where to find, and that they had been read at this trial.
And by one of these statements you confessed that the accusers had been instructed and suborned by you; and by the other you confessed your own inconsistency, liable to the double charge of folly and of perjury; when you stated that the man who you had previously said was an entire stranger to you, had come to your house, and that you had given the documents which he asked for to aid him in his accusation to a man whom you had from the beginning considered a trickster and a prevaricator.
You are too impetuous and fierce by nature.
You do not think it allowable for a word to escape from any man's mouth which may not fall pleasantly and complimentary on your ears.
You came forward in a rage with everybody which I perceived and comprehended the moment I saw you, before you began to speak, while Gellius, the dry nurse of all seditious men, was giving his evidence before you.
For on a sudden you sprang forward like a serpent out of his hole, with eyes starting out of your head and your neck inflated and your throat swelling so that
I defended my old friend, who was, nevertheless an acquaintance of yours, though in this city an attack on another, such as you are now making, is sometimes found fault with, but the defence of a man never is.
But I ask you why I should not defend Caius Cornelius?
I ask whether Cornelius has ever passed any law in defiance of the auspices? whether he has despised the Aelian or the Fufian law? when he has offered violence to the consul? whether he has occupied any temple with armed men? whether he has driven away by violence any magistrate who was exercising his veto? whether he has profaned any religious ceremonies? whether he has drained the treasury? whether he has pillaged the republic?
These, all these, are actions of yours.
No imputation of this sort is cast upon Cornelius.
He was said to have read a document.
It was urged in his defence, his colleagues giving evidence in support of his cause, that he read it not for the sake of reading it but for the sake of examining it more particularly.
However, it was quite certain that Cornelius dismissed the council that day, and submitted to the interposition of the veto.
But you who are offended at my defending Cornelius, what cause do you bring to your advocates to uphold, or what countenance have you to show?
when you already point out to them in an imperious manner, what a disgrace it will be to them if they defend you by thinking the defence of Cornelius a matter for accusation and abuse of me.
However, Vatinius, remember this that a little after the time when I defended him in a way which you say gave great offence to all good men, I was appointed consul in the most honourable manner in which any one has been elected since the memory of man, not only by the exceeding zeal in my behalf of the entire Roman people, but also by the special and extraordinary exertions in my cause of every virtuous man; and that I gained all these honours by living in a modest manner, which you have over and over again said that you hoped to obtain by dealing in the most impudent prophecies.
For as regards your having blamed me for my departure, and your having attempted to renew the grief and lamentation of those men to whom that day was most miserable, which, however, was to you most joyful, I will make you this reply, that when you and the other pests of the republic were seeking a pretext to take up arms, and using my name as a cloak for your proceedings to pillage the property of the rich citizens, and to drink the blood of the chief men of the state, and satiate your barbarity and the long-standing hatred which you had cherished against all good men till it had become inveterate, I preferred to break the force of your frenzy and wickedness by yielding to it, rather than by resisting it.
Wherefore, I entreat you, O Vatinius, to pardon me for sparing the country which I had saved; and I beg you, if I bear with you who would willingly be a harasser and destroyer of the republic, to bear also with me who have been its preserver and its guardian.
Do you find fault with that man for having departed from the city, who, as you see, was recalled by the regret of all the citizens, and by the grief of the republic herself?
Oh, but you say that men were anxious for my return, not for my sake, but for the sake of the republic.
As if any man who had mixed himself up in the affairs of the state in a proper spirit could think anything more desirable for him than to be beloved by his fellow-citizens for the sake of the republic.
Forsooth, my nature, I suppose, is a harsh one, I am difficult of access, my countenance is forbidding, my answers to men are arrogant, my way of life insolent.
No one ever sought the aid of my humanity, no one was ever anxious for my intimacy, for my advice, or my aid; for mine, out of regret for whom (to say the least of it) the forum was sad, the senate-house silent, and all studies of virtuous and liberal sciences voiceless and lifeless.
However, I will allow that nothing was done for my sake.
Let us admit that all those resolutions of the senate and commands of the people, and decrees of all Italy, and of all companies, and of all colleges and guilds concerning me were passed for the sake of the republic.
What then, O man most ignorant of the character of solid glory and real dignity, could possibly happen better for me?
What could be more desirable as regards the immortality of my glory and the everlasting recollection of my name, than for all my fellow citizens to be of this opinion, that the safety of the state was indissolubly bound up with my individual safety?
But I will send you back the arrow which you aimed at me.
For as you said that I was dear to the senate and people of Rome not so much for my own sake as for that of the republic, so I say that you, although you are a man of scandalous character, disgraced by every sort of foulness and infamy, still are detested by the city, not so much on your own account as for the sake of the republic.
And, that I may at length come to speak of you, this shall be the last thing which I will say of myself.
What any one of us may say of himself, that is not the question.
Let good men judge; that is the consideration of the greatest importance and weight.
There are two times at which the decisions of our fellow-citizens about us are looked for with anxiety, one when our honours, and the other when our safety is at stake.
Honours have been given to few men with such good-will on the part of the Roman people as I have experienced.
No one has ever been restored to safety with such extraordinary zeal on the part of all the citizens as I have.
But what men think of you we have already had experience when you were a candidate for honour; and now that your safety is at stake, we are in expectation of what we shall see.
However, not to compare myself with these the leading men of the state, who are here to give their countenance to Publius Sestius by their presence, but merely to compare myself to one, the most impudent and vilest of men, I will just ask you, O Vatinius, you the most arrogant of all men, and also the most hostile to me, whether you think it was better and more desirable for this state, for this republic, for this city, for these temples, and for the treasury, and for the senate-house, and for these men whom you see around us, and their property, fortunes, and children, whether you think it was better and more desirable for all the rest of the citizens, and for the temples of the gods, and for the auspices, and for the religious rites and observances of the city, that I should have been born as a citizen in this city, or that you should?
When you have answered me this question, either so impudently that men will hardly he able to keep their hands off you, or in so melancholy a manner as to burst that inflated neck and throat of yours; after that, reply to me from memory to these questions which I am going to put to you.
And I will allow that dark period of your early youth to remain in obscurity.
You may with impunity, as far as I am concerned, have broken through walls in your youth, and plundered your neighbours, and beaten your mother.
Your infamous character has this advantage, that the baseness of your youth is concealed by your obscurity and vileness.
You stood for the quaestorship with Publius Sestius; while he was talking of nothing but the object which he had in view at the moment and you were constantly saying that you were thinking of obtaining a second consulship.
I ask you this. Do you recollect when Publius Sestius was unanimously elected quaestor, that you then were named as the last quaestor, against the will of every one; not owing to the kindness which the people felt for you, but only to that of the consul?
In that magistracy, when the province of Ostia, down by the water's edge, had fallen to your lot, raising a great outcry at the time, were you not sent by me, as I was consul, to Puteoli, to prevent gold and silver being exported from thence?
While occupied in the discharge of that duty, do you remember that, as you acted as if you supposed that you had been sent, not as a guardian to take care and keep the wealth at home, but as a carrier to distribute it, and as you in a most robber-like manner were examining into every one's house, and store, and ship, and harassing men occupied in business and in trade with most iniquitous law proceedings, frightening merchants as they disembarked from their ships, and delaying them as they were embarking,
do you recollect, I say, that violent hands were laid on you in Puteoli while you were present among the body of the Roman settlers? and that the complaints of the people of Puteoli were brought before me as consul?
Do you recollect that after your quaestorship you went as lieutenant into the further Spain, Caius Cosconius being the proconsul?
Do you recollect too, that though that journey into Spain is usually made by land, or if any one chooses to go by sea, there is a regular route by which they sail, you came into Sardinia, and from thence into Africa?
Were you not in the kingdom of Hiempsal, a proceeding on your part which was perfectly illegal without a decree of the senate to authorize it? Were you not in the kingdom of Mastanesosus? Did you not come to the strait by way of Mauritania?
and did you ever hear of any lieutenant of any part of Spain before you who went to that province by that route?
You were made tribune of the people, (for why need I put questions to you about the iniquities and most sordid robberies which you committed in Spain?)
I ask of you first in a general manner what description of dishonesty and wickedness did you omit to practise in your discharge of that office?
And I now give you this warning, not to mix up your own infamy with the high character of most eminent men.
I, in whatever questions I put to you, will question you yourself only, and I will drag you forth not from the dignity of a great man, which you affect, but from your own obscurity and darkness.
And all my weapons shall be directed at you in such a manner, that no one else shall be wounded (to use an expression of your own) through your side; my arrows shall stick in your lungs and in your entrails.
And since the beginnings of all great things are derived from the gods, I wish you to answer me, you, who are accustomed to call yourself a Pythagorean, and to put forth the name of a most learned man as a screen to bide your own savage and barbarian habits, what depravity of intellect possessed you, what excessive frenzy seized on you, and made you, when you had begun your unheard-of and impious sacrifices, accustomed as you are to seek to evoke the spirits of the shades below, and to appease the D Manes with the entrails of murdered boys, despise the auspices under which this city was founded, by which the whole of this republic and empire is kept together, and, at the very beginning of your tribuneship, give notice to the senate that the responses of the augurs and the arrogance of that college should be no obstacle to your proceedings?
Next to that I ask you whether you kept your promise in that particular?
Did the fact of your knowing that on that day the heavens had been observed, delay, or not delay your summoning the council, and proposing your intended law?
And since this is the one thing which you say belongs to you in common with Caesar, I will separate you from him, not only for the sake of the republic, but also for the sake of Caesar, lest any stain from your extraordinary infamy should seem to attach itself to his dignity.
First of all, I ask you whether you trust your case to the senate, as Caesar does?
Next, what sort of authority that man has who defends himself by the conduct of another and not by his own?
Next (for my real sentiments will at times burst forth, and I cannot help saying without circumlocution what I feel,) even if Caesar had been rather violent in any particular, if the importance of the contest and anxiety for glory, and his eminent courage, and his admirable nobility of character had carried him away at all, which would have been endurable in that great man, and would have deserved to be obliterated from our minds by the mighty exploits which he has subsequently performed, will you, you wretch, assume the same privilege to yourself, and is the voice of Vatinius, the thief and sacrilegious man, to be heard, demanding that the same indulgence is to be allowed to him that is allowed to Caesar?
For this is what I ask of you.
You were a tribune of the people.
Separate yourself from the consul.
You had nine gallant men for your colleagues.
Of these there were three whom you knew to be every day observing the heavens, whom you used to laugh at, whom you used to call private individuals, of whom you see two now sitting here in their robes of office; (you know that you sold the official robe of an aedile which you had had made for yourself to no purpose;) and the third, you are aware, after that tribuneship, in which you oppressed and ill-treated him, gained the consular authority, though a very young man.
There were six others; of whom some openly adopted your opinion, and some held a sort of middle course.
All had laws which they wished to propose; and among them my own intimate friend Caius Cosconius, one of our judges, had several, some even drawn up by my advice; a man who makes you ready to burst with envy when you see him invested with the rank of aedile.
I wish you to reply to me.
Did any one of the whole college venture to bring forward any law, except you alone?
And how did you become possessed of so much audacity, how did you dare to act with so much violence, as alone you, a man raised out of the mud, beyond all comparison the lowest of all men in every respect to think that a proper subject for your contempt and scorn, and derision, which all your nine colleagues thought deserving of their fear and awe?
Have you ever known of any one tribune of the people, since the foundation of the city, having transacted business with the people when it was known that any magistrate was observing the heavens?
I wish you also to answer me, as, while you were tribune of the people, the Aelian and Fufian laws still existed in the republic; laws which have repeatedly checked and repressed the frenzy of the tribunes; in contravention of which no one has ever dared to act except you; (though those same laws the year after, when two men were sitting in the temple, whom I will not call consuls, but betrayers of this state, and pestilences, were destroyed at the same time with the auspices, and the power of intercession, and all public law:) Did you ever hesitate to transact business with the people, and to convene the assembly in defiance of these laws?
Have you ever heard of any one out of all the tribunes of the people that ever existed, however seditious they may have been, being so audacious as to summon an assembly in defiance of the Aelian and Fufian laws?
I ask you this, also, whether you endeavoured, whether you wished, whether, in short, you intended, (for these all amount to the same thing, so that if it ever only occurred to your mind, there is no one who would not think you worthy of the greatest severity of punishment,) I ask you, I say, whether you ever intended in the course of that intolerable (I will not say reign of yours, for that is a word which you would like me to use, but) piratical power, to be made augur in the room of Quintus Metellus?
so that whoever beheld you might feel a twofold grief and misery, both from his regret for a most illustrious and most gallant citizen, and from the honour of a most worthless and infamous one.
I ask you, did you think, I will not say, that the republic had been so undermined while you were tribune, or that the constitution had been so much battered and shaken, but that this city had been so entirely stormed and overthrown, that we could endure Vatinius for an augur?
Here also I ask, if you had been made augur, as you were anxious to be, the bare idea of which on your part caused us, who hated you, a pain which we could hardly endure, while they who were your intimate friends could scarcely forbear laughing at it;
still I ask, I say, if in addition to the other wounds under which you believed the republic to be sinking, you had added the deadly and fatal blow of your augurship, would you have decreed that which every augur ever since the time of Romulus has invariably decreed, that when Jupiter was sending forth his lightning it was impious to transact business with the people; or, because you had constantly done so, would you as augur have put an end to the system of taking auspices altogether?
And, not to waste any more words on your augurship, (and I speak of it all against my will, as I do not wish to recollect the ruin of the republic; for, indeed, you yourself never thought that you would be augur as long as not only the majesty of these men, but as long as that city itself remained standing,) still, to pass over your dreams, I will come to your acts of wickedness.
I wish you to answer me.
When you were leading Marcus Bibulus, the consul, I will not call him a man of the justest sentiments with respect to the republic, lest so powerful a man as you, who disagreed with him, should be offended with me; but I will call him a man who certainly never took any violent steps, who never performed any act of hostility towards you in the republic, but who only felt in his heart a great disapproval of your actions; when, I say, you were leading him, the consul, to prison, and when your colleagues sitting at the Valerian table ordered him to be released did you or did you not make a bridge in front of the rostra, by joining the stages together along which bridge, a consul of the Roman people, a man of the greatest moderation and wisdom removed from all assistance cut off from all his friends, was to be led by the inflamed violence of profligate men, a most shameful and miserable spectacle, not only to prison but to execution and to death?
I ask whether there was ever any one before your time so wicked as to do such a thing as that?
So that we may know whether you are an imitator of old crimes or an inventor of new ones.
And when you, by counsels and atrocities of this sort, carried on under the name of Caius Caesar a most merciful and excellent man, but in reality by your own wickedness and audacity, had driven Marcus Bibulus from the forum, and the senate-house, and the temples, and from all public places, and had compelled him to shut himself up in his own house; and when the life of the consul was only saved, not by the majesty of the empire, or by the sanctity of the laws, but only by the protection which his own doors and walls afforded him; did you not send a lictor to drag Marcus Bibulus from his house by force, in order that, though even in the case of private individuals the sanctity of their house is always observed, while you were tribune of the people even his own house should not be a safe refuge for the consul?
Answer me at the same time, you who call us tyrants who are agreed together as to our views for the general safety, were not you a tribune of the people, but in reality an intolerable tyrant raised of some obscure mud and darkness?
and did not you attempt in the first instance to overturn the republic, which was originally founded in obedience to auspices, by the destruction of those same auspices arm after that have not you been the only man to trample under foot and disregard those most holy laws, I mean the Aelian and Fufian laws, which subsisted through the furious times of the Gracchi, and through all the audacity of Saturninus, which survived unhurt the rabble of Drusus, and the contests of Sulpicius, and the massacres of Cinna, and even the battles and bloodshed of Sulla?
Did you not threaten the consul with death, and blockade him when he had shut himself up in his house, and attempt even to drag him out of his house?
And you, who by means of that magistracy emerged out of actual beggary, and who now even alarm us by your riches, were you not so inhuman as to endeavour, by means of your proposed law, to get rid of and destroy the chosen men and chief leaders of the state?
When you had produced in the assembly Lucius Vettius, who had confessed in the senate that he had been armed with the intention of putting Cnaeus Pompeius, that great and illustrious citizen, to death with his own hands; when you had produced him as a witness in the rostra, and placed him in that temple and place consecrated by the auspices; (in that place in which other tribunes of the people have been in the habit of bringing forward the chief men of the state, in order to sanction their authority by their presence,
there you wished Vettius the informer to employ his tongue and voice in support of your wickedness and ambitious designs:
did not Lucius Vettius say, in that assembly which you had convened, when questioned by you, that he had had those men for the originators and encouragers of, and accomplices in that wicked conduct, whom if the city had been deprived of, (and that was your real object at that time,) it could not have continued to stand?
You had endeavoured to murder Marcus Bibulus, as you were not contented with shutting him up in his house; you had stripped him of his consulship, you were anxious to deprive him of his country.
You wished also to murder Lucius Lucullus, whose exploits you envied above measure, because, I suppose, you from your boyhood had had an eye yourself to the glory of a general; and Caius Curio, the unceasing enemy of all wicked men, the leader of the public council, a man of the greatest freedom in maintaining the common liberties of the citizens, with his son, the chief of the youth of Rome, and who had already shown more devotion to the cause of the republic than could have been expected from his age;
and Lucius Domitius, whose dignity and respectability of character, I suppose, blinded the eyes of Vatinius, and whom you hated at the moment on account of your common hatred of all virtuous men and whom you had long feared with reference to the future on account of the hopes which all men had conceived, and indeed do still entertain of him; and Lucius Lentulus, this man who is one of our judges now the priest of Mars because he was at that time a competitor of your dear friend Gabinius all these you wished to crush by means of the information of this same Vettius.
But if Lentulus had then defeated that disgrace and pest of the republic, which he was prevented from doing by your wickedness, the republic would not have been defeated;
moreover, you wished by means of the same information and the same accusation to involve his son in his father's ruin.
You comprehended in the same information of Vettius and in the same body of criminals, Lucius Paullus, who was at the time quaestor in Macedonia.
How good a citizen! how great a man!
who had already banished by his laws two impious traitors to their country, domestic enemies; a man born for the salvation of the republic.
Why should I complain of your conduct to myself?
When I ought rather to return you thanks, for having thought me deserving of not being separated from the number of gallant and virtuous citizens.
But how was it that you were so insane as when Vettius had now summed up his oration just as you pleased, and had uttered his calumnies against all the lights of the city, and had descended from the rostra to call him back on a sudden, and converse with him in the sight of the Roman people? and then to ask him whether he could not give the name of any one else?
Were you not pressing upon him to name Caius Piso, my son-in-law; who, at a time when there was a great abundance of virtuous young men, still has left no one behind him of equal temperance, and virtue, and piety to himself?
and also Marcus Laterensis, a man who devotes all his days and nights to thinking of glory and of the republic?
Did not you, O you most profligate and abandoned enemy, propose an investigation into the conduct of so many honourable and excellent men, and at the same time most honourable rewards for your informer Vettius?
and afterwards, when this conduct of yours was condemned, not merely by the secret feelings of every one, but by their open reproaches, did you not strangle that very man Vettius in prison, in order that there might be no evidence of your having procured his information by bribery, and that no investigation of that guilt might be instituted so as to affect you yourself?
And since you are constantly repeating that you proposed a law to allow each party to reject judges alternately, in order that every one may see that you could not contrive even to do right without committing some crime or other, I ask you whether, after a just law had been proposed at the beginning of your magistracy, and after you had also proposed several others, you were waiting till Caius Antonius was prosecuted before Cnaeus Lentulus Clodianus?
And after a prosecution was instituted against him, did you not immediately pass a law against him, "Whoever was prosecuted after the proposal of your law," in order that a man of consular rank unhappy man! might be deprived by just that moment of time, of the benefit and equitable provisions of your law?
You will say that there was great intimacy between you and Quintus Maximus.
An admirable defence of your guilt!
No doubt it is the greatest praise of Maximus, that after he had adopted the quarrel against Caius Antonius, and undertaken the prosecution, and after a president of the court and a bench of judges had been selected, he was unwilling to allow his adversary a power of striking off judges which would have been too favourable for him.
Quintus Maximus did nothing inconsistent either with his own virtue, or with the precedents of those most illustrious men, the Paulli, the Maximi, and Africani; whose renown we not only hope will be renewed by this man's virtue, but we actually see that it is so.
It is your dishonesty, your guilt, your wickedness, that when you had proposed a law under a pretence of mercy, you put it off till a time when it might serve a purpose of cruelty.
And now, indeed, Caius Antonius consoles himself under his misery with this one fact that he had rather be at a distance to hear that the images of his father and his brother, and that his brother's daughter, are placed, not in the house of their family, but in prison, than be at hand to see it.
And since you so despise the property of others, and boast in a most intolerable manner of your own riches, I desire you to answer me, whether you, while tribune of the people, made any treaties with foreign states, or kings, or tetrarchs? whether you got any money out of the treasury by your laws? whether you did not at that time deprive people of the most valuable part of their privileges? whether it was Caesar or the farmers of the revenue that you were robbing?
And as this is the case, I ask you whether, having been a most miserably poor man, you did not become an exceedingly rich one that very year in which a most stringent law was passed about extortion and peculation?
So that all men may see that you trampled not only on the acts of us whom you call tyrants, but even on the laws of your own most intimate friend; before whom you are in the habit of employing hard words against us, who are very friendly to him, while you abuse him in the most insulting manner every time that you say that he is in the least degree connected with you.
And I wish also to know this from you, with what design or with what intention you attended at the banquet given by Quintus Arrius, an intimate friend of mine, in a black robe?
who you ever saw do such a thing before? who you ever heard of having done such a thing?
What precedent had you for such conduct, or what custom can you plead for it?
You will say that you did not approve of those supplications.
Very well. Suppose that those supplications were inexcusable.
Do you not see that I am not questioning you at all with respect to the occurrence of that year, nor of those circumstances in which you may appear to be concerned in common with any eminent men; but only about your own peculiar acts of wickedness?
Grant that the supplication was informal.
Still, tell me, who ever went to a banquet in a mourning garment?
For by such conduct the banquet itself is turned into a funeral feast; though the proper intention of a banquet is to be a scene of enjoyment and compliment.
But I pass over the fact of its having been a banquet of the Roman people, the day of festival, adorned with the exhibition of silver plate, and robes, and all sorts of furniture and ornaments; I ask who ever in a time of domestic mourning, who ever at a funeral of one of his own family, sat down to supper in a black robe?
who ever, except you, as he was leaving a bath, had a black gown given to him?
When so many thousand men were sitting at the feast, when the master of the feast himself, Quintus Arrius, was in a white robe, you introduced yourself into the temple of Castor, with Caius Fidulus and the rest of your Furies, in black garments, like the assistants at a funeral.
Who was there who did not then receive you with groans?
who was there who did not lament over the fate of the republic?
what other topic of conversation was there at that banquet except this, that this city, so great and so wise, was now exposed not only to your frenzy, but also to your derision?
Were you ignorant of the usual practice on such occasions?
had you never seen a feast of the sort?
had you never, when a boy or young man, been among the cooks?
had you not a short time before satisfied your ancient voracity at that most magnificent banquet of Faustus, a noble young man?
And when did you ever see the master of a feast and his friends in mourning, and in black robes, while sitting at a feast?
What insanity took possession of you, that you should think, that, unless you did what it was impious to do, unless you insulted the temple of Castor, and the name of a feast, and the eyes of a citizen, and ancient custom, and the authority of the man who had invited you, you had not given sufficient proof that you did not think that a properly decreed and formal supplication?
I will also ask you about this thing which you did as a private individual; a matter in which you, at all events, will not be able to say that your cause is at all connected with that of any other illustrious man.
I ask you, whether you were not prosecuted in accordance with the provisions of the Licinian and Junian laws?
whether Caius Memmius, the praetor, did not in accordance with that law, order you by his edict to appear on the thirtieth day?
When that day arrived, did you not do what was not only never done before in this republic, but what was never even heard of, at any time since the beginning of the world?
Did you not appeal to the tribunes of the people to save you from the necessity of pleading your cause?
I have put the case too lightly; although that of itself would be an unprecedented and an intolerable thing to have done; but did you not appeal by name to that pest of the year, to that Fury of his country, to that storm which was desolating the republic, to Clodius?
and when he could not by any right which he possessed, or by virtue of any precedent or by any power given him by his office, offer any obstacle to proceedings in a court of justice, he had recourse to his usual violence and frenzy, and put himself at the head of your soldiers as their leader.
And, in respect to this transaction, that you may not consider anything as a direct statement of mine, rather than as elicited by questions put to you, I will not impose on myself the burden of producing any evidence in support of what I say; and what I see that I shall have to state in the same place in a short time, I will reserve at present and I will not accuse you; but as I have done with respect to other matters, I will only put questions to you.
I ask you then, O Vatinius, whether any one in the state since the first foundation of the city, has ever appealed to the tribunes of the people to interpose and save him from having to plead his case?
Has any criminal ever mounted up to the tribunal of the president of the court which tried him and driven him down from thence by violence? and upset all the benches? and overturned all the balloting urns? and in short, in disturbing the court of justice committed all those crimes on account of which courts of justice were instituted?
Are you aware that Memmius fled at that time? that your accusers were with difficulty saved from your hands and those of your friends? that the judges were even driven away out of the tribunals which were near? that in the forum, in broad daylight in the sight of the Roman people, the investigation was put an end to, and the magistrates, and the usages of our ancestors, and the laws, and the judges, and the defendant and the penalty, were all alike disregarded and trampled on?
Do you know that all these circumstances were, by the diligence of Caius Memmius, entered and proved in the public records?
And moreover, I ask you this, when, after you had had an accusation preferred against you, you returned from your lieutenancy, in order that no one might think that you wished to avoid a trial; and when you used to say that, though you might have done whichever you pleased, still you preferred pleading your cause, as you had been accused; I ask, I say, how it was consistent with that conduct of yours, in being unwilling to avail yourself of the door of escape which your lieutenancy opened to you, for you to have recourse to an impious source of assistance by means of a most dishonest appeal?
And since mention has been made of your lieutenancy, I wish also to hear from you, by what resolution of the senate you were appointed lieutenant?
I understand, from your gestures, what answer you are going to give.
By your own law, you say.
Are not you, then, a most manifest parricide of your country?
Had not you had regard to the idea that the conscript fathers might be wholly destroyed from out of the republic?
did you not even leave this to the senate, which no one ever took from it the privilege, namely, of having all lieutenants appointed by authority of that order?
Did the great public council appear to you so contemptible? did the senate appear so depressed? did the republic appear so miserable and prostrate, that the senate was no longer able to appoint, in conformity with the uniform precedent of our ancestors, the messengers of peace and war, and managers, and interpreters, and authors of warlike determinations, and ministers of the different sorts of provincial duty?
You had taken from the senate the power of decreeing provinces to the different magistrates, and the decision as to what general was to be appointed to a command, and the management of the treasury; things which the Roman people never coveted for itself, as it never endeavoured to deprive the republic of the direction of the supreme council.
Come, some of these things have been also done by others; it has seldom happened, but still it has happened, that the people has selected a general.
Who ever heard that lieutenants have been appointed without a resolution of the senate to authorize it? No one before you.
Immediately after you, Clodius did the same thing, in the case of those two pestilences of the republic; and, on this account, you deserve to be punished with still greater misfortunes; because you have injured the republic, not only by your deed, but also by your example; and because you are not only infamous yourself, but you have also wished to teach others to be so too.
Do you not know that, on all these accounts, you have been branded with the unfavourable judgment of those most strict men, the Sabines, of those brave tribes, the Marsi and the Peligni, people of the same tribe as yourself, and that there is no other instance, since the foundation of Rome, of any man of the Sergian tribe having lost the votes of that tribe?
And I wish to hear this also from you, why it is, since I carried the law with respect to bribery and corruption in accordance with the terms of a resolution of the senate and carried it without violence, and with every proper regard to the auspices and to the Aelian and Fufian laws that you do not consider that a law?
especially as I obey your laws whatever the means are by which they were carried; while my law expressly forbids any one to exhibit shows of gladiators within two years of his standing, or being about to stand for an office, unless he does so in compliance with a will on a day appointed in the will.
How can you be so insane as to dare to exhibit shows of gladiators actually at the very time when you are a candidate?
Do you think that any tribune of the people can be found like that undeniable gladiator of yours, who will interpose to save you from being prosecuted according to the provisions of my law?
And if you disregard and despise all these considerations, because you have persuaded yourself, as you are in the habit of boasting openly, that though gods and men may be both unwilling, still you shall be able to gain everything which you desire in consequence of the incredible regard which Caius Caesar has for you;
have you ever heard, has any one told you, that lately at Aquileia, Caius Caesar, when some accidental mention was made of some circumstances, said that he was exceedingly indignant that Caius Alfius had been passed over, because he knew the admirable loyalty and honesty of the man; and that he was also greatly annoyed at any one having been made praetor, who was wholly opposed to his opinions and interests? That, on that, some one asked him how he liked Vatinius being repulsed? and that he replied, that Vatinius had done nothing in his tribuneship without a sufficient recompense; and that, as he cared about nothing but money, he could afford to fail in attaining honour with great equanimity.
And if that man, who for the sake of increasing his own dignity has willingly allowed you to go on in your headlong course at your own risk, with no fault of his own, judges you himself to be totally unworthy of all honour;
if your neighbours, and your connections, and the men of your own tribe hate you so, as to think your repulse their triumph; if no one beholds you without groaning, if no one mentions your name without cursing you, if men shun you, avoid you, and cannot bear to hear your name; if, when they see you, they shudder at you as an evil omen; if your relations disown you, and the men of your own tribe execrate you, and your neighbours dread you, and your connections are ashamed of you; lastly, if all your evil humours have left your odious face and settled in other places; if you are the object of general hatred to the people and the senate, and to all the tribes of the country; what reason can you have for wishing for the praetorship rather than for death?
especially as you try to make yourself out a friend of the people, and as you cannot possibly do anything which would be more agreeable to the people than you would if you were to kill yourself!
But that we may hear at length how fully you reply to my interrogations, I will now conclude my examination of you, and at the end I will ask you a few questions relating to the cause itself.
I ask you what is the meaning of all this inconsistency and levity of yours, that in this trial you extolled Titus Annius in the very same words in which good men and good citizens have been in the habit of extolling him, when lately, when you were produced before the people by that foul Fury, Clodius, you gave false evidence against him with the greatest eagerness?
Is this to be a matter left to your option and in your power, so that when you see Clodius's band of artisans, and that troop of furious and abandoned men, you then say, as you said in the assembly, that Milo has besieged the republic with gladiators and men who combat with beasts; but when you come before such men as these, then you do not venture to say anything against a citizen of extraordinary virtue, and integrity, and wisdom, and firmness?
But as you praise Titus Annius so excessively, and by your encomium cast some sort of slight stain on that most illustrious man, (for Titus Annius would prefer being one of those men who are loaded with reproaches by you,) still I ask, since in the administration of the affairs of the republic there has been an entire community of and agreement in every counsel between Titus Annius and Publius Sestius, (a fact which has been proved not only by the decision of the good, but also by that of the wicked; for each of them is now on his trial on the same account and for the same accusation, the one having had a prosecution instituted against him by that man whom you are sometimes accustomed to confess is the only man who is more worthless than yourself, and the other being reduced to the same condition by your design indeed, not with his assistance,) I ask, I say, how you can separate those men in your evidence, whom you connect together by your accusation?
The last thing which I wish you to answer me is this: As you said a great deal against Albinovanus with respect to his prevarication, I wish to know whether you said or did not say that you were not pleased at Sestius being prosecuted for violence, and that he ought not to have been so prosecuted; and that there was no law and no charge on which he was not more liable to impeachment?
Did you also say that the cause of Milo, a most admirable man, was generally considered as closely connected with his cause?
and that the things which were done by Sestius in my behalf were agreeable to good men?
I am not now arguing against the inconsistency of your language and of your evidence; for you have given evidence at great length against those identical actions of this man which you say have been approved of by good men; and as for the man with whom you connect the cause and danger of my client, Sestius, you have extolled him with the highest praises.
But I ask this; whether you think that Publius Sestius ought to be condemned according to the provisions of a law under which you say that he never ought to have been accused at all?
or, if you think that your opinion ought not be asked while you are giving your evidence, lest I should appear to be attributing to you any authority by so doing, I ask whether you gave evidence against a man on his trial for violence, who you say never ought to have been prosecuted for violence at all?
If any one of you, O conscript fathers, is waiting to see what provinces I shall propose to decree to the consuls, let him consider in his own mind what men I must think it most desirable to recall from the provinces; and then he will not have any doubt what ought to be my sentiments, when he has once seriously thought what it is absolutely inevitable that they should be.
And if I were the first to deliver the opinion which I am about to state, you would in truth praise it; if I were to stand alone in it, at all events you would pardon me.
Even if my opinion were to appear to you on the whole somewhat ineligible, still you would make some allowance for my just indignation.
But, as the case stands at present, O conscript fathers, I feel no ordinary delight because it is so entirely for the advantage of the republic that Syria and Macedonia should be the provinces decreed to the consuls, that my own private feelings are in no respect at variance with the general good; and because also I can cite the authority of Publius Servilius, who has delivered his opinion before me, a most illustrious man, and of singular good faith and attachment both to the republic in general, and to my safety in particular.
And if he, both just now, and whenever he has had any opportunity or possibility of speaking on the subject, has thought it his duty to brand not only with his adverse opinion but with the greatest severity of language, Gabinius and Piso, as the two monsters who have been almost the destruction of the republic, both on other accounts, and also most especially because of their extraordinary wickedness and unseemly inhumanity towards me, with what feelings ought I myself to be actuated towards those men, I whose safety they devoted and ruined for the gratification of their own evil passions?
But in declaring my sentiments at this time, I will not be guided by my indignation, nor will I make my speech subservient to my enmity.
The same feelings which every individual among you ought to entertain towards those men, shall influence me also.
My own predominant and peculiar feeling of private indignation, which, however, you have always considered as belonging to yourselves in common with me, I will put aside while delivering my opinion, and reserve for a more fitting opportunity of revenge.
There are four provinces, O conscript fathers, concerning which I understand that opinions have as yet been delivered: the two Gauls, which at present we see united under one command; and Syria; and Macedonia; which, against your will, and when you were suffering under oppression and constraint, those pernicious consuls seized on as their reward for having overturned the republic.
According to the provisions of the Sempronian law, we have now to decree two to the consuls.
How is it possible for us to doubt about Syria and Macedonia being these two?
I say nothing of the fact that those men are holding them at present who procured them in such a way that they did not get them till they condemned this order of ours till they had destroyed your authority and put an end to it in the state till they had destroyed all public credit and good faith endangered the lasting safety of the Roman people, and harassed me and my friends and relations in the most shameful and barbarous manner.
All these private matters, all these transactions which took place in the city, I say nothing about; though they are of such a nature that Hannibal himself never wished so much evil to this city, as those men have done.
I come to the case of the provinces themselves, of which Macedonia, which was formerly fortified not by the towers built, but by the trophies erected by numbers of our generals, which had long ago been reduced to a state of tranquillity by many victories and triumphs, is now so harassed by the barbarians who are not allowed to rest in peace in consequence of the avarice of the late consul, that the people of Thessalonica, placed in the lap as it were of our empire are compelled to abandon their town and to fortify their citadel, that that military road of ours which reaches all through Macedonia as far as the Hellespont is not only infested by the incursions of the barbarians but is even studded with and divided among Thracian encampments.
And so those nations which had given large sums of money to our illustrious commanders to purchase the blessings of peace, in order to be able to replenish their houses which had been thus drained, instead of the peace which they had purchased, have waged against us what is little short of a regular war.
And now that very army of ours, collected by a most splendid enlistment, and by a very rigid levy, has almost entirely perished.
I say this with the most real grief.
The soldiers of the Roman people have been taken prisoners, put to death, abandoned, and dispersed in a most miserable manner.
They have been wasted away by neglect, by famine, by disease, by every sort of disaster; so that (and it is a most scandalous thing) the wickedness of the general appears to have been chastised by the punishment of the fatherland and the army.
And this Macedonia, as all the neighbouring nations had been subdued, and all the barbarians checked, we used to be able to preserve by its own resources, in a peaceable state, and in perfect tranquillity, with a very slight garrison, and a small army, even without a commander-in-chief, by means of lieutenants, and by the bare name of the Roman people.
And yet now, when there is a man there with consular command and a consular army, it is so harassed that it is scarcely able to recruit its strength by a peace of any duration.
And in the meantime who is there of you who has not heard and who does not know that the Achaeans are every year paying a vast sum to Lucius Piso? that all the revenues and harbour duties of the Dyrrachians have been converted to a source of profit for this one man? that the city of the Byzantines, a city most loyal to you and to this empire, is harassed as if it belonged to an enemy?
to which city he, after he could no longer squeeze anything out of them, because of the poverty to which he had reduced them, and could not by any acts of violence extort anything more from them, miserable as they were, sent his cohorts into winter quarters, and gave them commanders whom he thought likely to be his most complying and diligent agents in wickedness, and ministers to his desires.
I say nothing of the way in which he exercised his jurisdiction in a free city contrary to the laws and to the resolutions of the senate.
I pass over his murders, I omit all mention of his acts of lust; of which there is a most bitter token, for the lasting recollection of his infamy, and almost bringing even our sovereignty into just odium, in the fact that it is notorious that some virgins of the noblest birth threw themselves into wells, and by a voluntary death escaped from otherwise inevitable disgrace.
Nor do I omit them now because they are not most enormous atrocities, but because I am speaking without the support of any witnesses.
But who is there who is ignorant that the city of the Byzantines was entirely filled and superbly decorated with statues? which the citizens, even when exhausted by the great expenses of important wars, while sustaining the attacks of Mithridates, and the whole force of Pontus, boiling over and pouring itself over all Asia which they repulsed with difficulty at their own great risk, even then, I say, and afterwards, the Byzantines preserved those statues and all the other ornaments of their city and guarded them most religiously.
But when you, O most unhappy and most infamous of men, became the commander there, O Caesoninus Calventius then a free city, and one which had been made so by the senate and people of Rome, on account of its recent services, was so plundered and stripped of everything, that, if Caius Virgilius the lieutenant, a very brave and incorruptible man, had not interfered, the Byzantines would not have retained one single statue out of all their great number.
What temple in all Achaia? what spot or what grove in the whole of Greece, was there of such sanctity that a single statue or a single ornament has been left in it?
You purchased from a most infamous tribune of the people, at the time of that general shipwreck of the city, which you, the very man who were bound to govern it rightly, had been the main agent in overturning; you purchased, I say, at that time, for an immense sum of money, the power of pronouncing judgment on the people of the free cities, with respect to the moneys which had been advanced, contrary to the resolutions of the senate, and the law of your own son-in-law.
What you had bought, you sold in such a manner that you either never gave any decision at all, or else you deprived Roman citizens of their property.
But I am not bringing forward these facts at this moment, O conscript fathers, as charges against this man, I am merely arguing with respect to the province.
Therefore I pass over all those things which you have often heard of and which you are well aware of, even when you do not hear of them.
I say nothing of his audacious conduct in the city, which he has fixed deep in the recollection of your eyes and minds; I say nothing of his arrogance, of his insolence, of his cruelty.
Let those dark acts of lust of his lie hid, acts which he tried to conceal by his stern countenance and supercilious look, not by modesty and temperance.
I am arguing about the province, the welfare of which is at stake in this matter.
Will you not send a successor to such a man as this?
Will you allow him to remain any longer?
a man whose fortune, from the very moment that he first reached the province, has so vied with his wickedness, that no one could decide whether he was more undeserving or more unfortunate.
But as for Syria, is that Semiramis any longer to be retained there?
a man whose march into the province bore the appearance of king Ariobarzanes having hired your consul to come and commit murder, as if he were some Thracian.
His very first arrival in Syria was signalized by the destruction of the cavalry; after that, all his best cohorts were cut to pieces.
Therefore, in Syria, since he has been the commander-in-chief, nothing has been done beyond making money-bargains with tyrants, and selling decisions, and committing robbery and piracy and massacre; while the general of the Roman people, with his army in battle array, stretching forth his right hand, did not exhort his soldiers to the pursuit of glory, but only kept crying out that everything had been bought by him and was to be bought still.
And as for the miserable farmers of the revenue, (miserable man that I also am, when I see the miseries and sufferings of those men who have deserved so well at my hands,) he handed them over as slaves to the Jews and Syrian nations, themselves born for slavery.
He laid down as a rule from the very beginning, and he persevered in it, never to decide an action in favour of a farmer of the revenue; he rescinded covenants that had been made without any injustice, he took away all the garrisons established for their protection; he released many people who were subject to pay tributes and taxes from such payments; whatever town he was living in or whatever town he arrived at, there he forbade any farmer of the revenue or any servant of such farmer to remain.
Why need I enlarge on this?
He would be considered a cruel man if he had shown such a disposition towards our enemies, as he did show towards Roman citizens, especially towards those of that order which has hitherto always been maintained by its own dignity and by the goodwill of the magistrates.
Therefore, O conscript fathers, you see that the farmers of the revenue were ground down and nearly ruined, not by any rashness with which they had entered into their contracts, nor by any ignorance of the proper methods of transacting business, but by the avarice, the pride, and the cruelty of Gabinius.
And to their assistance indeed, in the present difficulties of the treasury, it is actually indispensable that you should come.
Although there are many of them whom you cannot now relieve, men who by the means of that enemy of the senate of that most bitter foe of the equestrian order and of all virtuous men, wretched that they are, have lost not only their property but their honourable position; men whom neither parsimony nor temperance nor virtue nor labour nor respectability of character, have been able to protect against the audacity of that glutton and robber.
What are we to do?
shall we suffer those men to perish who are even now supporting themselves on the resources of their patrimony or on the liberality of their friends?
Or, suppose any man has been prevented by the enemies means from enjoying his public rights is that man protected by the law of the censors?
but in the case of a man who is prevented by one who is an enemy, though he may not be actually called one, is that a man whom we ought not to assist?
Retain then in the province a little longer that man who makes covenants with the enemy respecting the allies and with the allies respecting the citizens, who thinks himself a more important man than his colleague on this account that he has deceived you by his morose appearance and by his countenance, while he himself has never once pretended to be less worthless than he really is.
But Piso boasts in another sort of fashion that he in a very short time has brought it to pass that Gabinius is not thought the most infamous of all men.
Do not you think that you ought to recall these men from their provinces even if you had no one to send thither in their places?
Would you, could you retain there these two pests of the allies, these men who are the destruction of the soldiers, the ruin of the farmers of the revenue, the desolators of the provinces, the disgracers of the empire?
But you, yourselves, in the preceding year did recall these very men when they had only just arrived in the provinces.
And if they at that time escaped from that punishment, through no merit of their own, but through the influence of others, greatly against your consent, still they have undergone a much greater and severer punishment.
For what severer punishment could befall any one, in whom there exists, if not any respect for his reputation, at all events some fear of punishment, than to have those letters of theirs utterly disbelieved which announced that the republic had been very successful in war?
The senate decided this, when in a very full house it refused Gabinius a supplication; they decided, in the first place, that no belief at all could be given to a man polluted with every sort of guilt and wickedness; and, secondly, that the affairs of the republic could not possibly be managed successfully by a traitor, especially by that man who was known to be at the time an enemy of the republic; and, lastly, that even the immortal gods themselves did not choose their temples to be thrown open, and supplications to be addressed to them in the name of a most profligate and wicked man.
Therefore, that other man is either himself a learned man, and one well instructed by his Greek slaves, with whom he now sups behind the scenes, as he used to do before the curtain, or else he has wiser friends than Gabinius, from whom no letters are produced.
Shall we then have these men for our generals?
the one of whom does not venture to inform us whether he is styled Imperator; and the other must in a few days repent of having ventured to mention such a thing to us, if his clerks do not tire of writing.
And if that man has any friends, or indeed, if it be possible that any one should be a friend to so savage and foul a brute, they comfort themselves with this consolation, that this senatorial order once refused an application to Titus Albucius.
But first of all, the cases are very unlike.
The proprietor had had a battle with one auxiliary cohort against a lot of banditti clad in sheepskins in Sardinia.
And a war against the mightiest nations and tyrants of Syria was brought to a termination by means of a consular army, and a magistrate invested with the supreme military command.
In the next place, Albucius had had already decreed to himself in Syria the same thing which he was soliciting from the senate.
For it was notorious that he like a Greek, and like a light-headed inconsiderate man as he was had celebrated something like a triumph in the province itself.
And therefore the senate marked their displeasure at this precipitate conduct of his by the refusing of a supplication.
But let him in truth enjoy this as some comfort, and let him think this very eminent mark of disgrace all the less considerable because it has been inflicted on himself alone, provided only that he is content to expect the same end as that man by whose precedent he consoles himself.
Especially as Albucius was not liable to the reproach of either Piso's lust or Gabinius's audacity and yet fell by this one blow, the infamy with which he was branded by the senate.
But the man who proposes to decree the two Gauls to the two consuls would return both these men in their provinces.
But he who proposes to decree them one of the Gauls and either Syria or Macedonia still would retain one of these men; and while they are both equal in wickedness, he proposes to make their future condition unequal.
No, I will make them, says he, praetorian provinces in order that Piso and Gabinius may have successors appointed immediately.
Yes; if you are allowed to do so.
For then the tribune will be able to intercede with his veto; but at present he cannot do so.
Therefore I myself who now propose to decree to the consuls who are to be elected Syria and Macedonia, am prepared also to make them praetorian provinces, in order that the praetors may have their provinces for a year, and that we may see those men among us as soon as possible whom we cannot see at all with any equanimity.
But believe me, those men will never have successors appointed to them, except when a motion shall be made in accordance with the provisions of that law by which it is unlawful for any one to interpose his veto while the debate is pending about the provinces; therefore, as this opportunity is lost, you must now wait an entire year; during which interval the calamities of the citizens, the miseries of the allies, and the impunity of the most wicked men may be extended.
But even if they were the most excellent of men, still, in my opinion, it could never be advisable to appoint a successor to Caius Caesar.
Now, concerning this matter, O conscript fathers. I shall declare my real sentiments, and I shall not be disconcerted by that interruption of my most intimate friend, who did a little while ago interrupt my speech, as you heard.
That excellent man says that I ought not to be more hostile to Gabinius than to Caesar; for that all that storm, to which I yielded, was raised by the instigation and assistance of Caesar.
And if I were in the first instance to reply that I was having regard to the common advantage, and not to my own private sufferings, could I not establish that, when I say that I am doing what I well may do according to the example of other most valiant and most illustrious citizens?
Did Tiberius Gracchus (I am speaking of the father, and would that his son had never degenerated from that father's virtue!) gain such great glory because he, while tribune of the people, was the only one of the whole college who was any assistance to Lucius Scipio, though he was the bitterest possible enemy, both to him and to his brother Africanus; and did he not swear in the public assembly that he had by no means become reconciled to him, but that it seemed to him quite inconsistent with the dignity of the empire that, after the generals of the enemy had been led to prison while Scipio was celebrating his triumph, the very man also who had triumphed should be led to the same place?
Who had a greater number of enemies than Caius Marius?
There were Lucius Crassus, Marcus Scaurus, (were there no more?) and all the Metelli.
But those men not only forbore to recall that enemy of theirs from Gaul by their votes, but also, out of consideration for the Gallic war, they even voted him the province out of the regular order.
A most important war has been waged in Gaul; very mighty nations have been subdued by Caesar; but they are not yet established with laws, or with any fixed system of rights, or by a peace which can be very thoroughly depended on.
We see that the war has been carried on, and, to say the truth, nearly brought to a conclusion; but we shall only see it all actually terminated in a successful manner, if the man who commenced it remains to follow it up to the last.
If a successor is appointed to him, there is great danger that we may hear that the embers of this momentous war are again fanned into a flame and rekindled.
Therefore I, a senator, an enemy, if you please, of the man himself, feel it my duty to be, as I always have been, a friend to the republic.
What if I lay aside my enmity itself for the sake of the republic, who, I should like to know, would have a right to blame me?
especially as I have at all times thought that I ought to seek for the models for all my intentions and for all my actions in the conduct of the most illustrious men.
Was not, I should like to know, was not that great man Marcus Lepidus, who was twice consul, and also Pontifex Maximus, praised not only by the evidence of men's recollection, but also in the records of our annals, and by the voice of an immortal poet, because on the day that he was made censor, he immediately in the Campus Martius reconciled himself to Marcus Fulvius his colleague a man who was his bitterest enemy in order that they might perform their common duty devolving on them in the censorship with one common feeling and union of good will?
And to pass over ancient instances, of which there is no end, did not your own father, O Philippus, did not he become reconciled at one and the same time with all his greatest enemies?
to all of whom the same attachment to the republic now reconciled him which had previously separated him from them.
I pass over many instances because I see before me these lights and ornaments of the republic Publius Servilius and Marcus Lucullus;
would that that great man, Lucius Lucullus, were still alive!
What enmities were ever more bitter in this city that those which subsisted between the Luculli and the Servilii?
But in those most gallant men the welfare of the republic, and their own dignity, not only put an end to that ill-feeling, but even changed it into friendship and intimacy.
What?
did not Quintus Metellus Nepos while consul in the temple of the all good and all powerful Jupiter, influenced by your authority and also by the incredible dignity of eloquence of that same Publius Servilius, become reconciled to me though I was far away, and do me the greatest possible service?
Is it possible for me to be an enemy to this man, by whose letters, by whose glory, and by whose messengers my ears are every day saluted with previously unknown names of tribes, and nations, and places?
I burn, believe me, O conscript fathers, (as indeed you do believe of me, and as you feel yourselves,) with an incredible love for my country; which love compelled me formerly to encounter most terrible dangers which were hanging over it, at the risk of my own life; and again, when I saw every sort of weapon aimed from all quarters against my country, drove me to put myself in their way, and to expose myself singly to their blows on behalf of the whole body of citizens.
And this, my ancient and perpetual disposition towards the republic, now reunites and reconciles me to and unites me in friendship with Caius Caesar.
In short, let men think what they please; it is impossible for me to be other than a friend to one who deserves; well of his country.
In truth, if I have not only taken on myself the enmity of, but have declared and waged open war against those men who wished to destroy all these things with fire and sword; though some of them were my own personal acquaintances, and some had been saved on capital trials through my defence of them; why should not the same republic which was able to make me hostile to my friends, be able also to reconcile me to my enemies?
What reason had I for hating Publius Clodius, except that I thought him likely to prove a mischievous citizen to my country, inasmuch as, inflamed by the most infamous lust, he trampled under foot by one crime two most holy considerations, religion and chastity?
Is it, therefore, doubtful from these actions, which he has done and which he is doing every day, that I in opposing him was consulting the interests of the republic more than my own tranquillity; but that some others, who defended him, thought more of their own ease than they did of the peace of the community?
I admit that I was of a different opinion to Caesar with respect to the affairs of the republic, and that I agreed with all of you: but now I am agreeing also with you with whom I felt in common before.
For you, to whom Lucius Piso does not venture to send letters respecting his exploits, you who have condemned the letters of Gabinius with a most remarkable stigma, and an unprecedented mark of disgrace have decreed supplications to Caius Caesar in such number, as were never decreed before to any one in one war, and with such attending circumstances of honour as were never voted to any one at all.
Why, then, need I wait for any man to act as a mediator between us, in order to reconcile me to him?
I am following you, O conscript fathers, I am obeying you, I am adopting your opinions; yours, I say, who, as long as you had no very favourable opinion of the designs of Caius Caesar with respect to the republic saw that I too was very little connected with him; since you changed your opinions and inclinations on account of his great achievements you have seen me also not only the sharer of your sentiments but also the panegyrist and advocate of them.
But what is the reason why in this cause men so exceedingly marvel at and find fault with my opinions when I also before now proposed and voted for many things which concerned that man's dignity more than they did the safety of the republic?
I proposed and carried a supplication of fifteen days in Caesar's honour the bill being passed in the terms which I drew up.
It would have been sufficient for the good of the republic to have had it last only the same number of days as the supplication in honour of Caius Marius.
That could not have been accounted by the immortal gods a scanty thanksgiving which was as great as had heretofore been offered in the most important wars.
Therefore that increased number of days was given to the dignity of the men.
And in respect of that, I, who as consul brought forward the motion, first, for decreeing a supplication of ten days to Cnaeus Pompeius after Mithridates had been slain and the Mithridatic war been terminated, I, in compliance with whose opinion it was that the ordinary number of days that a supplication in honour of a consul lasted was doubled (for you all agreed with me when, having had the letters of that same Pompeius read, and knowing that all wars both by sea and land were happily terminated, you decided a supplication of twelve days) I, I say, admired the virtue and greatness of mind of Pompeius in that, when he himself had hitherto been preferred to all other men in every sort of honour, he now was giving a more ample honour to another than he himself had received.
Therefore, in that supplication which I proposed, the honour was paid to the immortal gods, and to the established usages of our ancestors, and to the welfare of the republic.
But the dignity of the language in which the decree was couched, and the honour and the novelty of the attendant circumstances, and the number of the days, was meant as a compliment to the renown and glory of Caesar himself.
A motion was lately brought forward before our body concerning the pay of the army.
I not only voted for it myself, but I laboured earnestly to induce you to vote for it; I replied to many of the arguments of those who objected to it; I supported it also by writing.
In that case also, I was rather considering the dignity of the man who commanded the army, than any particular necessity that existed for the measure.
For I thought that he, even without this additional supply of money, was able to maintain his army with the booty that he had already acquired, and to terminate the war.
But I thought it would be unbecoming to diminish the glory and splendour of that triumph of his by any parsimony on our part.
A discussion took place also about the ten lieutenants whom he wished to have appointed; and some voted altogether against giving them, others asked for precedents, others wished to adjourn the consideration of the question, and others declared their opinion in favour of it without any complimentary expressions to Caesar himself.
But on that occasion, I spoke in such a manner as to let all men see that, though I thought the measure advantageous to the republic, I was promoting it more cordially out of a desire to pay due honour to the dignity of Caesar.
And I who have been received in all those discussions with silent attention now that the question is about the provinces which are to be decreed to the consuls am interrupted; though in all the former transactions it was only a compliment to an individual that I urged, while now I have no motive but the consideration of the war and the general welfare of the republic.
It is the delightful nature of the country, I suppose, and the splendour of the cities, and the civilized state and accomplished habits of those nations and natives, it is a desire for victory, it is a wish to extend the boundaries of our empire, that detains him there!
what more uncivilized than their towns?
what more barbarous than their citizens?
Moreover what can be imagined more desirable than the victories which he has already gained or what can be discovered beyond the ocean?
Is his return to his country likely to be disagreeable to any one?
Does time foster his wish to see his country again, or does it rather increase his forgetfulness of it?
And do those laurels of his which he has gained amid such dangers, lose their greenness by the time that elapses after their acquisition?
If, then, there be any one who is not attached to that man, still such an one has no reason for recalling him from his province.
It is only recalling him to glory to triumph, to receive congratulations, to receive the highest honours which the senate can bestow, to receive the thanks of the equestrian order, and to become the object of the devoted affection of the people.
For I feel, O conscript fathers, that we at this time, while engaged in decreeing provinces to the consuls, ought to have a regard to the preservation of perpetual peace.
For who is there who is not aware that all our other possessions are safe from all danger, and even from all suspicion of wars?
We have for some time seen that immense sea, by the disturbed condition of which not only our voyages by sea were impeded, but even our cities and our military marches and roads were exposed to annoyance, now, in consequence of the valour of Cnaeus Pompeius, possessed from the ocean to the very extremity of Pontus, like one vast harbor in a safe and defensible state; and as for those nations, which by their mere numbers and the immensity of their population, were sufficient to overthrow our provinces, we have seen some of them so thinned in numbers, and others so severely checked by that same man, that Asia, which was formerly the limit of our empire, is now itself bounded on the further side by three of our provinces.
I might go on speaking of every region and of every race of men.
There is no nation which is not either so far destroyed as scarcely to have any existence at all, or so utterly subdued as to be quite tranquil; or else so entirely at peace with us, as to share our exultation at our victories and at the extension of our empire.
The war with Gaul, O conscript fathers, has been carried on actively since Caius Caesar has been our commander-in-chief; previously, we were content to act on the defensive, and to repel attacks.
For our generals at all times thought it better to limit themselves to repulsing those nations, than to provoke their hostility by any attack of our own.
Even that great man, Caius Marius, whose godlike and amazing valour came to the assistance of the Roman people in many of its distresses and disasters, was content to check the enormous multitudes of Gauls who were forcing their way into Italy, without endeavouring to penetrate himself into their cities and dwelling-places.
And lately, that partner of my labours, and dangers, and counsels, Caius Pomptinus, that most gallant man, crushed in battle a war of the Allobroges which rose up suddenly against us, and which was excited by that impious conspiracy, and defeated those tribes who had provoked us, and then he remained quiet, contented with the victory by which be had delivered the republic from alarm.
But I see that the counsels of Caius Caesar are widely different.
For he thought it his duty, not only to war against those men whom he saw already in arms against the Roman people, but to reduce the whole of Gaul under our dominion.
Therefore, he fought with the greatest success against those most valiant and powerful nations the Germans and Helvetians; and the other nations he alarmed and drove back and defeated, and accustomed to yield to the supremacy of the Roman people, so that those districts and those nations which were previously known to us neither by any one's letters, nor by the personal account of any one, nor even by vague report, have now been overrun and thoroughly examined by our own general, by our own army, and by the arms of the Roman people.
Hitherto, O conscript fathers, we have only known the road into Gaul.
All other parts of it were possessed by nations which were either hostile to this empire, or treacherous, or unknown to us, or, at all events, savage, barbarian, and warlike; nations which no one ever existed who did not wish to break their power and subdue: nor has any one, from the very first rise of this empire, ever carefully deliberated about our republic, who has not thought Gaul the chief object of apprehension to this empire.
But still, on account of the power and vast population of those nations, we never before have had a war with all of them;
we have always been content to resist them when attacked.
Now, at last, it has been brought about that there should be one and the same boundary to our empire and to those nations.
Nature had previously protected Italy by the Alps, not without some especial kindness of the gods in providing us with such a bulwark.
For if that road had been open to the savage disposition and vast numbers of the Gauls, this city would never have been the home and chosen seat of the empire of the world.
Now, indeed, they are at liberty to sink down if they please;
for there is nothing beyond those lofty heights as far as the ocean itself, which can be any object of fear to Italy.
But still it will be the work of one or two summers finally to bind the whole of Gaul in everlasting chains either by fear, or hope, or punishment or reward, or arms, or laws.
And if our affairs there are left in an unfinished state, and while there is still some bitterness of feeling remaining, although the enemy may be pruned back severely for the present, still they will raise their heads again some time or other, and come forth with recruited strength to renew the war.
Let, then, Gaul be left in the guardianship of that man to whose valour, and good faith, and good fortune it has already been entrusted.
If, in truth, he, having been distinguished by such marked kindness of Fortune, were unwilling to risk the favour of that fickle goddess too often; if he were anxious himself to return to his country, to his household gods, to that dignity which he sees in store for him in this city, to his most charming children, and to his most illustrious son-in-law; if he were impatient to be borne in triumph as a conqueror to the Capitol, crowned with the illustrious laurel of victory; if, in short, he were apprehensive of some disaster, as no event can now add so much glory to him as a mishap might deprive him of still it would be your duty to insist on all those affairs being brought to a termination by the same man who has begun them so successfully.
But when he has not yet satisfied his own desire for glory and for the safety of the republic, and as he prefers coming at a later period to reap the rewards of his toils rather than not discharging to the full the duty which the republic has committed to him; then certainly, we, for our part, ought not to recall a general who is so eager to conduct the affairs of the republic gloriously, nor to throw into confusion and to hinder his plans for the whole Gallic war, which are now almost matured and accomplished.
For I cannot at all approve of those opinions which have been expressed by some most illustrious men, one of whom proposes to give the consuls the further Gaul and Syria, and the other inclines to the nearer Gaul.
He who proposes the further Gaul, throws all those matters into confusion about which I have just been speaking, and shows at the same time that he is advocating a law which he affirms to be no law at all; and that he is taking away that part of the province to which no interruption can be given, but is not touching that part which has a defender.
The effect of his conduct also is not to meddle with that which has been conferred by the people while at the same time he a senator is anxious to take away what has been given by the senate.
The other disregards all consideration of the Gallic war; he discharges the duty of a virtuous senator: though he thinks the law invalid, still he observes it; for he fixes beforehand a day for his successor to enter on his office.
But it seems to me that nothing is more inconsistent with the dignity and principles of our ancestors than for the consul, who on the first of January is to have a province, to have it promised to him in this way, and not regularly decreed to him.
Suppose he were during the whole of his consulship without a province, though even before he was elected a province was decreed to him, is he to cast lots for a province, or not?
For it is absurd not to draw lots for one, absurd also not to get that which one has drawn by lot.
Is he to march out in the robe of a commander in chief?
Whither is he to march?
Why, to a place where he may not arrive before a certain fixed day.
All January and February he is not to have a province.
At last on the first of March up will spring a province for him all on a sudden.
Nevertheless if these sentiments prevail, Piso will remain in his province.
And though these are weighty considerations, still none of them are more serious than this that it is an insulting thing for a commander in chief to be mulcted as it were by a diminution of his provinces,
and we ought to take great care that such a thing should not be allowed to happen, not only not in the case of a most illustrious man, but not even in that of a man of moderate reputation.
I am well aware, O conscript fathers, that you have decreed many extraordinary honours to Caius Caesar; honours which are almost unprecedented.
In that he has amply merited them, you have been grateful; if I add, too, that he is a man most thoroughly attached to this order of the senate, you have been wise and provident.
For this order has never heaped its distinctions and kindness on any one who has subsequently thought any dignity preferable to that which he had obtained by your favour.
For it is not possible for any one to be the leading man in this body who has preferred courting the favour of the people.
But all men who have done this, have either distrusted themselves on account of their consciousness of their want of worth, or else they have been driven away from a union with this order on account of the disparagement of their merits by the rest, and so they have been almost constrained to throw themselves out of this harbour on those stormy billows.
And if, after they have been tossed about on those surges, and have become wearied of their voyage amid the whims of the people, having been successful in the conduct of the affairs of the republic, they show their faces again in the senate-house, and wish to gain the favours of this most honourable order, I say that they are not only not to be repelled, but are to be received with open arms, and courted.
We are warned by the bravest man and most admirable consul who has ever existed in the memory of man, to take care that the nearer Gaul be not decreed against our will to any one after the election of those consuls who are now about to be elected, and that it be not for the future occupied forever by these men who are the constant attackers of this order, by some turbulent system of currying favour with the mob.
And although I am not indifferent to the evil consequences of such a measure, O conscript fathers, especially when warned of them by a consul of the greatest wisdom, and one who is an especial guardian of peace and tranquillity, still I think that there is an evil to be regarded with even more apprehension than that, the evil, I mean, of diminishing the honours of most illustrious and powerful citizens, and rejecting their zeal for the maintenance of this order.
For even supposing that Caius Julius, having been distinguished by all sorts of extraordinary and unprecedented honours by the senate, were compelled to deliver up this province to one whom you would be very unwilling to see there, still I cannot possibly be induced to suspect that be would deprive that body of liberty by which he himself had the greatest glory conferred on him.
Lastly, what disposition every one will have I know not; I am aware only of what my own hopes are.
I, as a senator, am bound to take care, as far as I can, that no illustrious or powerful man shall appear to have any right to feel offended with this body.
These sentiments I should express out of regard to the republic, even were I ever so great an enemy to Caius Caesar.
But I do not think it foreign to the present discussion, with the object of being for the future less frequently interrupted by certain persons, or less reproved in the opinion of some who forbear to interrupt me, to explain briefly what is the nature of my relations with Caesar.
And in the first place, I pass over that period of familiarity and intimacy which existed between him and me, and my brother and Caius Varro, our cousin, from the time that we were all young men.
After that I became deeply engaged in public affairs, my sentiments on matters of state were no different from his, that we were of entirely opposite public parties though without any interruption of our private friendship.
He, as consul, adopted measures in which he wished to have me for a partner; and if I was opposed to the measures themselves, still I could not avoid being pleased at the opinion of me which he displayed by that wish.
He entreated me also to accept the office of quinquevir.
He wished me to be one of three men of consular rank most closely connected with himself; and he offered me any lieutenancy or embassy I pleased, with as much honour and distinction as was agreeable to me.
All which offers I rejected with great firmness in my own sentiments, but not without feeling obliged to him for them.
How wisely I acted is not now the question; for many will not approve of my conduct.
At all events I acted with consistency and firmness, inasmuch as though by accepting them I might have fortified myself by the most irresistible assistance against all the wickedness of my enemies and should have been able to repel the attacks of popularity hunters by the protection of popular men, I preferred to meet any fortune to encounter any violence and any in jury, rather than differ from the wise and righteous sentiments of the senate, or deviate from the line of conduct which I had marked out for myself.
But a man is bound to be grateful, not only if he has received a kindness, but if he has had an opportunity of receiving one.
I did not think that all those compliments and distinctions with which he was loading me became me, or were suited to the exploits which I had performed.
But I saw that he regarded me with the same friendly disposition with which he looked on that chief of the citizens, his own son-in-law.
He afterwards assisted my great enemy in passing over to the ranks of the plebeians, either because he was angry with me when he saw that I could not be allured, not even by all his kindness, to unite with him, or because he was unable to withstand the entreaties of Clodius.
And even that was no injury to me in his opinion;
for he afterwards not only advised but actually entreated me to act as his lieutenant.
Even that I would not accept; not because I thought it inconsistent with my dignity, but because I had no suspicion that such wicked designs against the republic were entertained by the succeeding consuls as afterwards proved to be.
Therefore I have much more reason to fear that I may be blamed for arrogance of conduct with respect to his liberality towards me, than that I should be reproached with the injuries which he has done me in spite of our friendship.
Turn your eyes to that tempest to that season of darkness to all good men, to that sudden and unforeseen danger which overwhelmed all things, to that cloud which came over the republic to the ruin and conflagration of the city to the alarm given to Caesar with respect to all the acts of his consulship, to the fear of massacre with which all good men were struck, to the wickedness, and covetousness, and indigence, and audacity of the consuls!
If I was not aided by him then, he was under no obligation to aid me; if I was deserted by him, perhaps he was providing for his own safety; if I was even attacked by him, as some men think, or at all events wish me to think, then our friendship was violated, I received an injury, and he has deserved that I should be his enemy.
I do not deny it; but still, if he was anxious for my safety when you were all regretting me like the dearest of your sons, and if you all at the same time thought it of great importance to my cause that the inclinations of Caius Caesar should not be averse to my safety; and if I have his son in law as a witness of his good will towards me at that time, who himself stirred up all Italy in the municipal towns and the Roman people in the assembly, and you too who were always most devoted to me, in the Capitol, to take measures for my safety; if in short Cnaeus Pompeius is at the same time a witness to me of the good will which Caesar entertains for me, and a surety to him of my attachment to him; does it not appear to you that I ought rather to recollect the times that are long past and also to remember this time which is nearest to us now, and by means of these memories to eradicate that middle time so full of infamy and misery, if not from the history of events, (which indeed may be impossible,) at all events from my own mind?
But I, if I may not (as some people think I ought not) boast that I have sacrificed my own private feelings of indignation and enmity to the republic, which it appears to me to be the duty of a great and wise man to do, will at all events avail myself of this plea, which is of force not so much to gain praise as to avoid reproach, namely, that I am a grateful person, and that I am inclined to be moved, not only by such exceeding services as his, but even by a moderate display of good-will towards me.
I entreat of some most gallant men, who have done me great service, that, if I have been unwilling that they should be partakers of my labours and distresses, they will also spare me from being the partaker of their enmities; especially as they have granted to me that I have a right to defend those acts of Caesar's which I neither attacked nor defended before.
For the most eminent men of the state, by whose counsels I acted when I preserved the republic, and in deference to whose authority I avoided that union with Caesar to which he invited me, deny that the Julian laws, and the others which were passed during his consulship, were legally passed at all.
And at the same time they say that the bill for my proscription was passed in a manner contrary to the safety of the republic, but still without any illegal disregard of the auspices.
Therefore a man of the highest authority, and of the greatest eloquence, said with great positiveness that that disaster of mine was a funeral of the republic, but a funeral performed with all regular solemnity.
To me myself it is altogether excessively complimentary, that my departure should be called the funeral of the republic.
His other expressions I do not find any fault with, but I will assume them as a foundation for the sentiments which I feel.
For if men have ventured to say that that proposition was carried in a regular manner, for which there was no precedent nor any law authorizing such a bill to be carried, merely because no one had been observing the heavens at the time, had they forgotten that, at the time that the man who carried this bill was made a plebeian by a lex curiata, it was announced that a magistrate was observing the heavens?
And if it was absolutely irregular for him to be made a plebeian, how could he be made a tribune of the people?
And if his tribuneship be declared valid, there is then no one of Caesar's acts which can possibly be invalid; and so, will not, not merely his tribuneship, but also other matters the most mischievous imaginable, appear to have been passed with proper regularity, if it be decided that the religious respect due to the auspices was preserved?
Wherefore you must decide either that the Aelian law still exists, that the Fufian law has not been abrogated, and that it is not lawful for a law to be passed on every one of the dies fasti; that, when a law is being passed, there is no objection to observations of the heavens being taken, or to such an announcement being made by the magistrates, or to any one interposing his veto; that the decisions and animadversions of the censors, and that most strict inspection of morals, has not been abolished in the city by nefarious laws; that if a patrician has been tribune of the people, he has been so in violation of the most sacred laws, if a plebeian, in disregard of the auspices: or else men must grant to me that it is not necessary for me in the case of good measures to be bound by those rules which they themselves do not adhere to in shameful ones; especially as it has been a proposal made by them to Caius Caesar several times, that he should carry the same measures in some other manner, (in some manner, that is, which the auspices required and which the law sanctioned;) and when, in the case of Clodius, the history of the auspices is just the same, and all the laws of the state have been overturned and destroyed.
This is the last thing which I have to say.
If I had any enmity against Caius Caesar, still at this time I ought to consult the interests of the republic, and to reserve my hostility for another time.
I might even, following the precedent of most eminent men, lay aside my enmity altogether for the sake of the republic;
but as I have never entertained any enmity to him, and as the idea of having been injured by him has been extinguished by services which he has done me, I, by my opinion, O conscript fathers, if the dignity of Caius Caesar is at stake, shall vote for the man; if any honour to be paid to him is under discussion, I shall consult the unanimous feeling of the senate if the authority of your decrees is the main point to be regarded, I shall uphold the consistency of our order by voting distinctions to this same commander-in-chief; if the everlasting consideration of the Gallic war is to be taken into the account, I shall consult the interests of the republic if I may have respect to my own private duty I shall show that I am not ungrateful.
And I wish, O conscript fathers, to induce you all to approve of my sentiments; but I shall not be greatly concerned if I fail to induce those men to approve of them who shielded my enemy in spite of your authority; or those who found fault with my reconciliation with their enemy, while they themselves do not hesitate to be reconciled both to my enemy and to their own.
If the authority of those who are advocates in a person's defence be of any weight, the cause of Lucius Cornelius has been defended by the most honourable men; if their experience is to be regarded, it has been defended by the most skillful lawyers; if we look to their ability, by the most eloquent of orators; or if it is their sincerity and zeal that we should regard, it has been upheld by those who are his greatest friends, and who are united to Lucius Cornelius not merely by mutual services, but by the greatest intimacy.
What part, then, have I in this defence?
That which is given to me by such influence as you have been pleased to allow me; by moderate experience; and by an ability which is by no means equal to my inclination to serve him.
For as to the other men by whom he has been defended, I see that to them he is under great obligations; but how much I am under obligations to him I will explain to you at another time.
This I assert at the beginning of my speech, that if I cannot by my exertions properly requite all those men who have been friendly to my safety and to my dignity, I will at all events recompense them as far as in my power by at all times both feeling and declaring my obligations and my gratitude.
How great was the energy displayed by Cnaeus Pompeius in speaking yesterday, O judges, how great his fluency, how great the riches of his eloquence, was shown plainly enough, not only by the secret feelings of your minds, but by your evident and unconcealed admiration.
For I never heard anything which appeared to me more acute as regards the state of the law,
I never heard a more copious recollection of precedents; I never heard a more skillful argument concerning treaties, nor any statements of more illustrious authority concerning our wars, or of more weight and dignity with reference to the general interests of the republic; I never heard any one speak more modestly concerning himself, or more eloquently concerning the cause and the charge.
So that that saying appeared to me to be a true one, which though some men devoted to literature and to learned studies were said to have given utterance to it, appeared nevertheless to be something incredible; namely, that the man whose soul contained every virtue, could with the most perfect ease do everything which he might wish to do.
For how could there have been a greater fertility and variety and richness of eloquence in Lucius Crassus, a man born to a most singular gift of oratory if even he had pleaded this cause than was displayed by that man who was able to devote just so much time to this study as he spared from the uninterrupted succession of wars and victories in which his life has been passed from childhood up to this time?
And all this makes my task of summing up the more difficult.
For, in truth, I am coming after an oration which has not just passed by your ears, but has sunk deep into the minds of all of you, so that you may very probably derive more pleasure from the recollection of that speech, than you can from the hearing not only of mine, but of any one else's speech whatever.
But in this I am forced to comply with the wishes not only of Cornelius, whose desires I cannot possibly thwart in this his hour of danger, but also with those of Cnaeus Pompeius, who has wished me the panegyrist of and the assistant in this action, and this determination, and this kindness of his, as I lately was in another cause which was pleaded before you, O judges.
And it appears to me that this is what the defendant himself deserves, that this is what the unexampled renown of this excellent man deserves, that this is what essentially belongs to the discharge of your duty, and that this is due to the cause itself, that, what it is quite notorious that Cnaeus Pompeius did, all men should allow he had a lawful right to do.
For there is nothing more true than that which he himself said yesterday, that Lucius Cornelius had now all his fortunes at stake, without being accused of any single crime of any description.
For he is not said to have stolen the rights of a citizen, nor to have given any false account of his family, nor to have proceeded in an underhand manner by any shameless falsehood, nor to have crept fraudulently into the register.
One thing alone is imputed to him, that he was born at Gades; a fact which no one denies.
All the rest the prosecutor admits.
He admits that he served in Spain, in a most severe war, with Quintus Metellus, with Caius Memmius; that he served both in the fleet and in the army; and, when Pompeius came into Spain and began to have Memmius for his quaestor, that he never left Memmius; that he went to take possession of Carthage; that he was present at those two hardly contested and most important battles of Sucro and the Durius; that he remained with Pompeius to the end of the war.
These are the battles of Cornelius.
Such were his exertions; such was his industry; such were his dangers encountered on behalf of our republic; such was his valour, worthy of a general; while his hopes were hopes of a reward in proportion to his dangers.
The rewards themselves are not the actions of him who obtained them, but of him who conferred them.
Therefore on account of this conduct he was presented by Cnaeus Pompeius with the freedom of the city.
That the prosecutor does not deny; but he finds fault with it, in such a manner that, as far as Balbus himself is concerned, his cause is approved of even at the moment that it is sought to punish him; in the case of Pompeius, his conduct is disapproved of, but no punishment is designed for him.
And this is the way in which they wish to condemn the fame and fortune of a most innocent man and the conduct of a most admirable commander.
Therefore it is the status of Cornelius as a citizen, and the action of Pompeius that are now on their trial before this court.
For you admit that this man was born of a most honourable rank in that state to which he belongs, and that from his earliest manhood disregarding all his private affairs, he has passed his whole time in our wars in the company of our own generals, and that he has been absent from no labour, from no siege, and from no battle.
All these things are full of glory, and are the peculiar glory of Cornelius; nor is there any crime in any part of such conduct.
Where then is his crime?
Is it because Pompeius presented him with the freedom of the city?
Is that a crime of Balbus's?
By no means, unless honour is to be accounted ignominy.
Whose crime is it then?
In reality nobody's at all; but if we look at the pleading of the prosecutor, it is clearly the crime of that man alone who gave him the freedom of the city.
But if he had been influenced by interest, he would probably have selected some less worthy man for that reward.
Even had he selected a good man, he would not have chosen one who had deserved as well of the state as Balbus; even if his action had been one of which it could not have been said that it was contrary to what was lawful, it would have been said that it was contrary to what was becoming.
But all such vituperation would have deserved to be rejected by you, O judges.
But at present what is it that is said?
What does the prosecutor say?
That Pompeius did what it was not lawful for him to do; which is a more serious charge than if he were to say that that had been done by him which was not expedient.
For there are things which are not expedient even if they are lawful.
But whatever is not lawful is most certainly not expedient.
Am I now, O judges, to hesitate to urge that it is impossible to doubt that we ought to confess that what it is notorious that Cnaeus Pompeius did was not only lawful, but also expedient for him to do?
For what qualification is wanting in this man, that, if he had it, we should consider that this liberty might lawfully be given and allowed to him?
Is it experience in affairs?
a man who during even the latter days of his childhood was beginning his course of the most important wars and commands?
most of whose equals in age have seen a camp less frequently than he has celebrated a triumph? who has celebrated as many triumphs as there are countries and parts of the world? who has won as many victories in war as there are kinds of war in the nature of things?
Is it ability?
when even the very results and terminations of transactions have been, not the guides, but the companions of his counsels?
a man in whom the most extraordinary good fortune has so kept pace with extraordinary valour, that, in the opinion of all men, more credit was due to the man than to the goddess; Have modesty, or integrity, or religion, or diligence ever been wanting in that man?
a man than whom our provinces, and all free nations, and all kings, and the very most distant people of the earth have not only never seen one more chaste, more moderate, and more religious, but have never in their hopes or wishes even imagined one.
Why need I speak of his authority, which is as great as it ought to be, springing from such great virtue and glory?
Is it not then, O judges, a shameful thing for the Roman people, that after the senate and people of Rome have conferred on that man the rewards of the most honourable dignity; when he not only did not ask for commands, but when he even refused them, an inquiry into his conduct should be now taking place, in such terms that there should be a discussion as to whether it was lawful for him to do what he has done; or whether, I will not say, it was lawful, but whether it was impious for him to do so?
(for he is said to have done it in contravention of a treaty, that is to say, in contradiction to the religion and good faith of the Roman people.) Is it not disgraceful to you yourselves?
I, when a boy, have heard my father say this.
When Quintus Metellus, the son of Lucius, was prosecuted for extortion and peculation, he, that man to whom the safety of his country was dearer than the sight of it, who had rather abandon his city than his opinion; when he, I say, was before the court, and when his account-books were being carried round to the judges that they might see the entry of one item, I have heard that there was not one judge among them Roman knights, most excellent men as they were, who did not avert his eyes, and turn himself altogether away, lest any one of them should appear for a moment to have doubted whether what such a man had entered in his public accounts was true or false.
And shall we open the question of the legality of a decree of Cnaeus Pompeius, pronounced in accordance with the vote of the senate?
Shall we compare it with the words of the laws? with the treaties? Shall we scrutinise everything with the most unfriendly minuteness?
They say that at Athens, when some man, who had lived among the Athenians with a high character for piety and wisdom, had given his evidence in public, and (as is the custom of the Greeks) was approaching the altar for the purpose of taking an oath in confirmation of it, all the judges cried out that he need not take the oath.
When Greeks were unwilling to appear to imagine that the good faith of a well-proved man felt itself more bound by the formality of an oath than by the simple obligation of truth, shall we have a doubt as to what sort of man Cnaeus Pompeius has been in respect of his regard for the religious observance of laws and treaties?
For do you mean that he acted in violation of the treaties ignorantly, or knowingly?
If you say that he did so knowingly, O, for the name of our empire!
O, for the preeminent dignity of the Roman people!
O, for the glory of Cnaeus Pompeius, so widely and universally diffused, in such a manner that the home of his renown has but the same boundaries and limits as our common empire!
O you nations and cities; and peoples, and kings, and tetrarchs, and tyrants, you witnesses not only of the valour of Cnaeus Pompeius in war, but also of his conscientiousness in peace!
You too I implore, you, O voiceless lands, and you, O soil of the most remote districts; you, O seas, O harbours, O islands, O shores!
For what land is there what place of habitation what spot in which there are not the deeply imprinted traces of this man's courage, and humanity, and spirit and wisdom?
Will any one venture to say that this man endued with such incredible and unheard of dignity and wisdom and virtue and consistency, has knowingly neglected and violated and broken treaties!
The prosecutor indulges me with a gesture.
He intimates that Cnaeus Pompeius acted ignorantly.
As if it were a lighter charge, when one has been occupied in affairs of state in so important a republic, and been presiding over the most serious transactions, to do anything which you know not to be legal, or to be utterly ignorant what is legal.
Do you really mean that he did not know, he who had waged a most formidable and important war in Spain, what were the rights of the city of Gades?
or that he did not catch the correct interpretation of a treaty made with the people, as not understanding their language?
Will any one then dare to say that Cnaeus Pompeius is ignorant of that which the most ordinary men, men of no knowledge of the world, of no military experience, which every common amanuensis professes to be acquainted with?
I, indeed, think on the contrary, O judges, that while Cnaeus Pompeius excels in every kind and variety of accomplishment, even of those which are not easily learnt without the most perfect leisure for their study, his most extraordinary credit and his most admirable knowledge consists in his thorough acquaintance with the treaties, and agreements, and conditions of other peoples, kings, and foreign nations, in short, with the entire laws of war and peace; unless, indeed, you mean to make out that the things which our books teach us while in the shade and at our leisure, Cnaeus Pompeius was incapable of learning, either from books, when he was in the enjoyment of peace, or from the actual transactions, when he was engaged in the business of the state.
It is my opinion, O judges, this action is more to be attributed to the fault of the times than of the individual.
Nor will I say any more about a trial of so scandalous a description.
For it is the stain and disgrace of this age to envy virtue, and to seek to crush the budding flower of worth and dignity.
In truth, if Cnaeus Pompeius had lived five hundred years ago, that man from whom, while a young man and a Roman knight, the senate had often sought aid for the general safety; whose exploits had had all nations for their stage, being crowned everywhere by the most illustrious victories, both by land and sea; of which three triumphs had been the witnesses, proving that the whole world was made subject to our empire; whom the Roman people had distinguished with unexampled honours, in that case if it were now said among you that anything that he had done had been done in contravention of a treaty, who would listen to such a statement?
No one.
For his death would have put an end to the envy of him, his achievements would rest in the glory of his undying name.
As then his virtue, if it were only heard of by us, would leave no room for doubt or question, shall it when present among us, when it has been experienced and beheld by ourselves, be injured by the voice of detractors?
I will, therefore, say nothing about Pompeius in the rest of my speech; but I entreat you, O judges, to retain in your minds and memories what I have said.
On the subject of the law, of the treaty, of precedents and of the uninterrupted usage of our state, I shall repeat those things which have been said already.
For neither has Marcus Crassus who, as was natural to expect from his eloquence and from his honesty, has in the most careful manner explained the whole bearings of the case to you nor has Cnaeus Pompeius whose speech abounded in every possible ornament of oratory, left me anything new, anything untouched by them to dilate upon: but since, though I drew back, they both wished that this last labour of putting, as it were, a finishing stroke to their work, should be undertaken by me, I beg of you that you will consider that I have undertaken this office and employment more out of regard for what I thought my duty, than from any desire of making a display as an orator.
And, before I approach the law of the case and the cause of Cornelius, it seems to me desirable to say a little about the common condition of all of us, for the sake of deprecating the malevolence of any one.
If, O judges, whatever may be the rank in which any one is born or whatever the station in which he is placed by birth in respect of fortune that same station he ought to maintain to his old age, and if all men whom either fortune has raised or whom their own labour or industry has ennobled, are to be visited with punishment, then there does not appear to have been a more severe law or condition of life imposed on Lucius Cornelius than on many other virtuous and gallant men.
But if the virtue and genius and humanity of many men, though born in the meanest class of life, and in the lowest degree of fortune, has not only obtained them friendship and a plentiful estate, but has gained them also the greatest praise and honour and glory and dignity, then I cannot understand why envy should be more prompt to attack Lucius Cornelius, than your justice should to come to the assistance of his modesty.
And therefore I do not ask of you what it is very important to ask, in order that I may not seem to throw any doubts on your wisdom or your humanity; but I must beg of you not to feel any hatred towards genius, not to be enemies of industry, not to think that humanity deserves to be oppressed, or virtue to be punished.
This I beg also; that if you see that my client's cause is of itself a sound and just one, you will allow his personal good qualities and accomplishments to be an assistance to him now that he is on his trial, rather than a hindrance.
The cause of Cornelius, O judges, arises from the law which Lucius Gellius and Cnaeus Cornelius passed in accordance with the resolution of the senate.
By that law we see that it is provided that those men shall be Roman citizens whom Cnaeus Pompeius shall separately present with the freedom of the city in accordance with the opinion of his council.
Pompeius here in court asserts that Lucius Cornelius was so presented with it.
The public records prove this to be the fact: the prosecutor admits it.
But he says that no man of a people joined to us by treaty was capable by law of becoming one of our citizens, unless his own people ratified the measure.
Oh what a splendid interpreter of the law! what a fine authority on points of antiquity! what an admirable corrector and reformer of our state, to imagine that treaties impose such a penalty on those who are bound by them, as to make them all incapable of receiving our rewards and kindnesses!
For what can possibly be said more ignorant than that it is requisite for the federate cities to ratify such a transaction?
For that is not a right peculiar to federate cities, but to all free nations.
But the whole of this, O judges, has at all times depended on this consideration, and on this intention, that when the Roman people had ordered anything, if the allied peoples and the Latins had adopted and ratified it, and if the law which we had among ourselves was in this manner established among some people on a firm footing, then that people should be bound by the obligations of that law; not in such a manner as to detract in the least from our privileges, but that those nations might enjoy either that law which was established among us, or some other advantage and benefit.
Caius Furius, in the time of our ancestors, passed a law concerning wills Quintus Voconius passed another concerning the inheritances of women; innumerable other laws have been passed about civil law; the Latins have adopted whatever of them they have chosen; even by the Julian law itself, by which the rights of citizenship were given to the allies and to the Latins, it was decreed that those people who did not ratify the law should not have the freedom of the city,
which circumstance gave rise to a great contention among the people of Heraclea, and among the people of Neapolis, as a great part of the population in those states preferred the liberty which they enjoyed by virtue of their treaty with us to the rights of citizenship.
Lastly, this is the meaning both of that law and of that expression, that the peoples who do ratify it enjoy its advantages owing to our kindness, and not owing to any right of their own.
When the Roman people has enacted anything, if it be a matter of that sort, that it appears it may be granted also to some other nations, whether joined to us by a treaty, or free to decide themselves which law they prefer using, not about our affairs, but about their own; then it seems necessary to inquire whether they have adopted and ratified our law, or not; but the senate never intended that those peoples should have the power of ratifying or declining to ratify measures which concern our republic, our empire our wars, our victory, and our safety.
But if it is not to be lawful for our generals, and for the senate, and for the Roman people, by holding out rewards to them, to tempt all the bravest and most virtuous men out of the cities of our allies and friends to encounter dangers in behalf of our safety, then we shall be deprived of what is a most exceeding advantage to us, and of what has often been a very great protection and support to us in dangerous and critical times.
But, in the name of the immortal gods!
what sort of alliance, what sort of friendship, what sort of treaty is that by virtue of which our city in its time of danger is to have no defender from Massilia, or from Gades, or from Saguntum; or, if there should arise an assistant to us from those cities, any one who may have aided our generals with the help afforded by his labour, or by his riches, or by his personal danger, any one who may have often fought hand to hand in our ranks against our enemies, who may have repeatedly exposed himself to the weapons of the enemy, to battle for his life, to imminent death, that such a one can by no possible means be rewarded with the honours contained in our rights of citizenship?
For it is a very serious consideration for the Roman people, if they are not to be able to avail themselves of the help of allies who are endued with any extraordinary virtue, and who may be willing to join themselves to us, and to consider our danger their own; and it is also an injurious and insulting thing towards the allies, and for those federate states that we are now discussing, that our most faithful and united allies should be shut out from these rewards and from these honours, which are open to our mercenary troops, which are open to our enemies, which are open often even to our slaves.
For we see that mercenary troops in numbers from Africa, Sicily, Sardinia and other provinces have had the freedom of the city conferred on them, and we know that those enemies who have come over to our commanders and have been of great use to our republic have been made citizens and lastly that slaves, beings whose rights, and fortune, and condition are the lowest of all, who have deserved well of the republic we see constantly presented publicly with liberty, that is to say, with the rights of citizenship.
Do you then, O you patron of all treaties and federate states, lay down this as the condition of the people of Gades, your fellow-citizens, that what is lawful for those nations which we have subdued with our arms, and reduced under our dominion, having the people of Gades for our assistants while doing so, namely, that if the Roman people shall permit it, they may have the rights of citizenship conferred on them by the senate or by our generals, is not to be lawful for the men of Gades themselves?
Suppose they had determined by their own decrees or laws that no one of their fellow citizens should enter the camp of a general of the Roman people, that no one should incur any personal risk or danger of his life in defence of our empire, that we should not be allowed to avail ourselves of the assistance of the people of Gades whenever we chose, and that in his private capacity no individual, being eminent for courage and valour, should dare to struggle to his own personal danger, in defence of our empire; we should naturally be very indignant at that, at the resources of the Roman people being diminished, at the courage of brave men being damped, and at our being deprived of the aid afforded us by the zeal of nations unconnected with us in our behalf, and by the valour of foreign peoples.
But it makes no difference, O judges, whether the federate states enact these laws that no one shall be permitted to leave those states for the purpose of sharing in the dangers of our wars, or that those things cannot possibly be ratified which we have given to their citizens on account of their virtue.
For we should not any the more have the advantage of these men for our assistants if we once take away all the rewards of virtue, than we should if we were to make it absolutely unlawful for them to meddle at all in our laws.
In truth, as, ever since the original birth of man, there have been but few men found, who, without any hope of reward, have been willing to expose their lives to the weapons of the enemy even for the sake of their own country, do you suppose that there will be any one who will expose himself to dangers in the defence of a republic with which he has not any connection, when not only no reward is held out to him, but when all reward for such conduct is prohibited from being bestowed?
But not only was that a most ignorant thing to say, which was said, about states ratifying and accepting our laws, as that is a privilege common to all free peoples, and not peculiar to federate cities; from which it must inevitably be understood, either that no one of the allies can be made a Roman citizen, or else that an inhabitant of the federate states may likewise be made one; but this great teacher of ours is ignorant also of the whole bearings of the law respecting a man's change of citizenship; which, O judges, is a thing which is not only clearly laid down in the public laws, but which depends also on the inclination of individuals.
For, according to our law, no one can change his city against his will, nor can he be prevented from changing it, if he pleases, provided only that he be adopted by that state of which he wishes to become a citizen.
As, for instance, if the people of Gades passed a bill concerning any Roman citizen by name, that he should become a citizen of Gades, our citizen would in consequence of that bill acquire a complete power of changing his city, and would not be hindered by any treaty from becoming a citizen of Gades after having been a citizen of Rome.
According to our civil law, no one can be a citizen of two cities at the same time; a man cannot be a citizen of this city, who has dedicated himself to another city.
And he may do so not only by dedication, which is a thing which we have seen happen in their misfortunes to most illustrious men, to Quintus Maximus, and Caius Laenas, and Quintus Philippus at Nuceria, and to Caius Cato at Tarraco, to Quintus Caepio and Publius Rutilius at Smyrna, who all became citizens of those cities.
(They could not lose their rights of citizenship here, before they had as it were changed their country by their change of citizenship.)
But a change of citizenship can also take place by a man's returning to his original city.
Nor was it without reason that a motion was submitted to the people concerning Cnaeus Publicius Menander, a freedman, whom in the time of our ancestors some ambassadors of ours when going into Greece wished to take with them as an interpreter, that that Publicius if he returned to his home, and after that again came back to Rome, should still be a Roman citizen.
For, in the recollection of earlier times, many Roman citizens of their own free will, not having been condemned by any process of law, nor having been in danger, have left our state and joined themselves as citizens to other cities.
But if it is lawful for a Roman citizen to become a citizen of Gades, either by exile, or by a return to his original city, or by a discarding of his rights of citizenship here, (to come now to the treaty, which, however, in fact has nothing to do with the cause in hand; for what we are discussing is the right of citizenship, and not the treaties,) what reason is there why a citizen of Gades may not be allowed to become a citizen of this city?
My opinion, indeed, goes quite the other way.
For as there is a path from all cities to our city, and as the road to all other cities is open to our citizens, so also, in proportion as each city is more closely united with us in alliance and friendship, by agreement, and covenant, and treaty, the more does that state appear to me to be entitled to a participation in our kindness and in our rewards.
But all other cities would without any hesitation receive our men into the rights of citizenship with them if we also had the same laws that other nations have.
But we cannot he citizens of this city and of any other city at the same time though in all other cities this is allowed.
Therefore in the Greek cities we see that Rhodians and Lacedaemonians and men from all quarters are enrolled among the citizens of Athens, and that the same individuals are citizens of many cities at the same time.
And I have seen some ignorant men, citizens of ours, led by this mistake, sitting at Athens among the judges and members of the Areopagus, in a regular tribe and class of Athenian citizens, being ignorant that it they acquired the rights of citizenship there they lost their rights here, unless they recovered them by a subsequent return to their rights here, and a renunciation of the others.
But no one who had any acquaintance with our laws or our customs, who wished to retain his rights as a citizen of Rome, ever dedicated himself to another city.
But the whole of this topic of my speech, and the whole of this discussion, O judges, has reference to the common right of changing one's city; it has nothing in it which is peculiar to the religious observance of treaties.
For I am defending the universal principle, that there is no nation on the whole face of the earth, whether at variance with the Roman people through some quarrel and hatred, or, on the other hand, united with us by the closest loyalty and mutual good-will, as to which we are forbidden to adopt any one of its citizens as our own, or to present any one of them with the freedom of our city.
Oh how admirable are our laws, and with what god-like wisdom were they established by our ancestors from the very first beginning of the Roman name, especially the law that no one of our people can be a citizen of more than one city, (for it is inevitable that dissimilar states must have a great variety in their laws,) and that no one can be compelled against his will to change his city, nor against his will to remain a citizen of any city.
For these are the firmest foundations of our liberty, that every individual should have it in his own power to retain or abandon his privileges.
And without any dispute, that has been the most solid foundation of our empire, and the thing which has above all others increased the renown of the Roman name, that that first man, the creator of this city, Romulus, taught by the treaty which he made with the Sabines, that it was expedient to increase the population of this city by the adoption of even enemies as citizens.
And in compliance with his authority and with the precedent which he established, the presentation of the freedom of our city to others has never been interrupted by our ancestors.
Therefore, many tribes from Latium, the people of Tusculum, the people of Lanuvium, and all other peoples of all other races, have been received into the privileges of our city; as, for instance, the Sabines, the Hernici, and the Volsci; the citizens of which cities were not compelled to change the city to which they belonged, if they were unwilling to do so; nor if any of them had acquired the privileges of our citizens by the kindness of the Roman people, would the treaty made with them appear to have been violated.
But some treaties are in existence, as for instance those with the Germans, the Insubres, the Helvetians, and the Iapidae, and with some of the barbarian tribes in Gaul in which there is a special exception made that no one of them is to be received by us as a citizen of Rome.
And if the exception prevents such a step from being lawful, it is quite evident that it is lawful where there is no such exception made.
Where, then, is the exception made in the treaty between us and the city of Gades, that the Roman people is not to receive any one of the citizens of Gades into their citizenship?
Nowhere.
And if there were any such clause, the Gellian and Cornelian law would have annulled it which expressly gave to Pompeius a power of giving the freedom of the city to anybody whatever.
The whole treaty, says the prosecutor, "is such an exception, because it was ratified with solemn oaths."
I can excuse you if you do not know much about the laws of the Carthaginians, for you had left your own city; and you were not able to examine our laws very strictly; for they prevented your having any opportunity of instituting such an examination by a public sentence.
What was there in that enactment which was passed concerning Pompeius by Gellius and Lentulus in their consulship in which any exception appears to have been made of treaties which had been ratified by an oath?
For first of all, nothing can be ratified in such a manner except what the burgesses or the common people have so ratified.
In the second place, such ratifications are to be accounted sacred, either because of the form of ratification itself, or because the invocation of the gods and dedication of the law, or else, because of some punishment to which the life of that man is devoted who acts in contravention of it.
What argument, then, of this sort can you allege with respect to our treaty with the city of Gades?
Do you assert that that treaty was solemnly ratified by the devotion of the life of any offender against it, or by any invocation of the gods to uphold the law?
I assert that nothing was ever submitted to the burgesses or to the common people with respect to that treaty
When, therefore even if it had been enacted that we were not to receive any man as a citizen, still that would have been ratified which the people enacted subsequently, nor would any exception have appeared to have been made by that expression, "If anything had been formally ratified by an oath," do you venture to say that anything is formally ratified in this way, with respect to which the Roman people has never come to any decision at all?
Nor, O judges, has this argument of mine any tendency to invalidate our treaty with the city of Gades.
For it would not become me to say anything against the rights of a city which has deserved very well at our hands, against the invariable opinion of antiquity, and against the authority of the senate.
For once, at a very critical period of this republic, when Carthage, being exceedingly powerful by sea and land, relying on the two Spains, was threatening this empire, and when those two thunderbolts of our empire, Cnaeus and Publius Scipio, had suddenly perished in Spain, Lucius Marcius, a centurion of the first division, is said to have made a treaty with the people of Gades.
And as this treaty was maintained more in consequence of the loyalty of that people, of our justice, and, indeed, of its own antiquity, than because it was ratified by any public bond of religion, the people of Gades, being wise men and well instructed in public law, when Marcus Lepidus and Quintus Catulus were consuls, made a request to the senate for a more regular treaty; and then the treaty was renewed or made (whichever you please to call it) with the men of Gades.
And concerning that treaty the Roman people never recorded any vote; and they cannot possibly be bound by any religious obligation which has been contracted without their orders.
And so the city of Gades obtained what it was well entitled to obtain by its services done to our republic, by the testimony borne in its favour by our commanders by the antiquity of its alliance with us, by the authority of Quintus Catulus, a most illustrious man by the formal decision of the senate, and by a regular treaty; but it has not received any additional sanction from any public religious ceremonies of ratification.
For the people has in no respect whatever bound itself, nor is the cause of the men of Gades any the worse for that; for it is upheld by many and those the very wealthiest of circumstances.
But however there is at present no room for that discussion; for nothing can be so ratified as to be sacred unless it be something that has been adopted by the burgesses or by the common people.
But if this treaty, which the Roman people, with the authority of the senate with the recommendation and decision of antiquity in its favour approves not only by its tacit inclination, but also by its open expression of opinion, had been also sanctioned by its votes, what reason was there, from the words of the treaty itself, why it should not have been lawful to receive a citizen of Gades into our city?
For there is nothing else provided for in the treaty except that there be a pious and everlasting peace.
What has that to do with the rights of citizenship?
That also is added which does not occur in every treaty: "Preserve, with all courtesy and respect, the majesty of the Roman people."
And that expression carries this force with it, that it shows that the people of Gades is the inferior party in the treaty.
First of all, the very description of word used "Preserve" which is a form that we are more accustomed to use in laws than in treaties is an expression of one giving a command, not of one addressing an entreaty.
In the next place, as the majesty of the one people is ordered to be preserved and no mention is made of the other, most certainly that people is placed on the higher footing and in the superior condition whose majesty is defended by the sanction of the treaty.
And in respect of this the interpretation of the prosecutor is quite undeserving of any reply, who said that the expression "with courtesy and respect," meant the same as "respectively" just as if he were explaining some ancient and nearly obsolete word.
Men are called courteous, kind, affable, pleasant.
" A man who courteously points out the way to a wanderer: good-naturedly, not sulkily; respectively" has surely no connection with the rest of the sentence, or with the subject.
And, at the same time, it is a perfect absurdity for a provision to be made in the treaty that they should "respectively" preserve the majesty of the Roman people; that is to say, that the Roman people is to wish its own majesty to be uninjured.
And if it were so now, as it cannot be, still the fact would remain, that provision had been made for our majesty, but none at all for theirs.
Can our majesty then be preserved with good feeling by the people of Gades, if we are not able to tempt the men of Gades by rewards to be anxious for its preservation?
Can there, in fact be any majesty at all, if we are prevented from availing ourselves of the consent of the Roman people to confer on our commander-in-chief the power of distributing honours and kindnesses as a reward of virtue?
But why am I arguing against statements which it would seem to me might be uttered with truth, if the people of Gades were speaking against me?
for, if they were to demand back Lucius Cornelius, I should reply, that the Roman people had enacted a law with respect to giving the freedom of the city; and that there was no occasion, nor was it usual for the entire people to ratify laws of this sort; that Cnaeus Pompeius, in accordance with the advice of his council, had given the freedom of the city to this man, and that the people of Gades had no single law whatever of the Roman people in their favour.
Therefore, that nothing had been sanctified by any peculiar solemnity, which appeared to be excepted against by the law; that if there were, still there had been no provision made in the treaty respecting anything but peace.
That this clause also was added, that they were bound to preserve our majesty unimpaired; which certainly would be diminished, if it was unlawful either for us to avail ourselves of the citizens of those nations as assistants in our wars, or if we were to have no power whatever of rewarding them.
But, now, why should I speak against the people of Gades, when the very thing which I am defending is sanctioned by their desire, by their authority, and by a deputation which they have sent hither on purpose?
For they, from the very first beginning of their existence as a separate people, and of their republic, have turned all their affections from zeal for the Carthaginians and eagerness in their cause, to the upholding of our empire and name.
And accordingly, when the Carthaginians were waging most tremendous wars against us, they excluded them from their city, they pursued them with their fleets, they repelled them with their personal exertions, and with all their resources and power.
They have at all times considered that phantom of a treaty made by Marcius as more inviolable than any citadel; and by this treaty and by that of Catulus, and by the authority of the senate, they have considered themselves as most intimately connected with us.
Their ambition, and our ancestors' wish, has been, that their walls, their temples, their lands, should be the boundaries of the Roman name and Roman empire, as Hercules wished them to be of his journeys and of his labours.
They invoke as witnesses our deceased generals, whose memory and glory survive for everlasting, the Scipios, the Bruti, the Horatii, the Cassii, the Metelli, and this man also, Cnaeus Pompeius whom you see before you;
whom when he was carrying on a great and formidable war far from their walls, they assisted with supplies and money and at this very time they invoke as witnesses the Roman people whom now, at a time of great dearness of provisions they have relieved with a large supply of grain as they had often done before.
They call them, I say, to witness that they wish this to be their privilege, to have a place permitted to them and to their children, whenever there are any of distinguished virtue in our camps and in the tent of the general and among our standards; and in our line of battle; and that by these steps they should have a power of rising up to the freedom of the city.
And if it be lawful to Africans, to Sardinians, to Spaniards, men who have been punished by the deprivation of their lands and by the imposition of tribute, to acquire the rights of citizenship among us by their virtue, but if it be not allowed to the men of Gades, who are united to us by duty, and by the antiquity of their alliance with us, and by their loyalty, and by our mutual dangers, and by an express treaty, to acquire the same rights, then they will think that they have not a treaty with us, but that most iniquitous laws have been imposed on them by us.
And, O judges, the very circumstances of this case show that this assertion is not one just invented by me for the purpose, but that I am saying what the men of Gades have instructed me to say.
I say that the men of Gades publicly entered into a connection of mutual hospitality many years before this time with Lucius Cornelius.
I will produce witnesses, I will produce ambassadors who will prove this; I will bring forward panegyrists, whom you see here, having been sent expressly to this trial, men of the highest character and of the most noble birth, to seek to avert the danger of my client by their prayers.
Lastly, by an act perfectly unheard-of among the people of Gades before this time, the moment that it was known that the prosecutor was preparing to bring Balbus before this court, the men of Gades passed most solemn resolutions of their senate respecting their own fellow-citizen.
Could the people of Gades have ratified this act of Pompeius more decidedly, (since I have taken a great fancy to the expression,) if what is meant by ratifying is, to approve of our decrees and commands by its decision, than when it enters into connections of hospitality for the express purpose of admitting, by so doing, that Balbus had changed his city, and of showing that it considered him entirely worthy of the honour of this city?
Was it possible for it to exhibit its own opinion and inclination more undeniably, than when it imposed a fine and a penalty on my client's prosecutor?
Was it possible for it to give its decision on the subject more plainly, than when it sent its most honourable citizens as deputies to this trial which is now taking place before you, to be the witnesses of Balbus's rights, and the panegyrists of his conduct through life, and his saviours from danger by their prayers?
In truth, who is there so insane as not to perceive that it is an object with the men of Gades to retain this right, and to prevent the road to this the most honourable reward which the city can confer from being closed against them for ever?
and that they have cause to rejoice exceedingly that this goodwill of Lucius Cornelius towards his friends is still in existence at Gades, and that his interest and power of serving his friends is now settled in this city?
For who is there of us to whom that city of Gades is not the more recommended owing to his zeal and care and diligence?
I say nothing of the great distinction with which Caius Caesar, when he was praetor in Spain, loaded that people; how he put an end to their disputes, how he established laws among them with their own permission, how he eradicated from the manners and customs of the citizens of Gades a sort of barbarism that had become almost inveterate among them; and how, at the request of this my client, he displayed the greatest zeal for and conferred the greatest services on that city.
I pass over many things which they obtain every day in consequence of this man's exertions and zeal either wholly, or at all events with more facility than they otherwise would have done.
Therefore the chief men of the city are here to stand by him and to defend him: with affection, as being their fellow citizen with their evidence as a citizen of ours; with kindness, as one who is now their most religiously-connected friend, from having been one of their noblest citizens; and with earnestness as a most diligent advocate of all their interests.
And that the people of Gades may not think, although they suffer no actual personal inconvenience, if it is lawful for their citizens to acquire the freedom of our city as a reward for their virtue, that still in this respect their treaty is a more unfavourable one than that which has been made with the other states, I will console those who are present here, most excellent men, and also that city which has ever been most faithful and most friendly to us,
and at the same time I will put you in mind, O judges, though you are not ignorant of the truth, that there has never hitherto been the slightest doubt expressed about that privilege concerning which this trial has been appointed.
Who, then are the men whom we consider the wisest interpreters of treaties and the men of the greatest experience in military law, and the most diligent authorities in examining into the different conditions and states of towns?
Surely those men who have already been placed in command and have had the conduct of wars.
In truth if that celebrated augur Quintus Scaevola, when he was consulted about the laws relating to mortgages; a man most skillful in law, occasionally referred those who consulted him to Furius and Cascellius as men who had invested their money in such securities and if we in the transaction referring to our aqueduct consulted Marcus Tugio, rather than Caius Aquillius, because constant practice devoted to one particular line of business often proves superior to ability and to general information, who can hesitate to prefer our generals to all the most experienced lawyers on earth in any case respecting treaties, and the whole state of the law of peace and war?
May I not therefore, mention, with your approbation, Caius Marius, the original author of that conduct and of that precedent which is found so much fault with by you?
Do you require any more weighty example? any one of more consistent wisdom? any one more eminent for virtue and prudence, and conscientiousness and equity?
Did he, then, confer the freedom of the city on Marcus Annius Appius, a most gallant man, and one endued with the most admirable virtue, when he knew that the treaty made with Camertum had been most solemnly ratified, and was in all respects a most equitable one?
Is it possible, then, O judges, that Lucius Cornelius should be condemned, without condemning also the conduct of Caius Marius?
Let then, that great man be present for a while to your thoughts, as he cannot appear before you in reality, so that you may behold him with your minds whom you cannot behold with your eyes.
Let him state to you that he has not been altogether unversed in treaties, nor wholly inexperienced in the nature of precedents, nor entirely ignorant of war; that he was the pupil and soldier of Publius Africanus; that he was trained in campaigns and in many warlike lieutenancies; that if he had read of as many wars as he has served in and conducted, and brought to a termination, that if he had served under consuls as often as he himself was consul, he might have learnt and become thoroughly acquainted with all the laws of war; that he never doubted for a moment that no treaty could hinder him from doing anything which was for the advantage of the republic; that he carefully selected all the bravest men out of every city which was closely connected with and friendly to us; that none of the people of Iguvium or of Camertum were excepted by treaty, so that their citizens were incapable of receiving from the Roman people the rewards of their virtue.
Therefore, when, a few years after this present of the freedom of the city, a very important and strenuously-contested question arose concerning the rights of citizenship according to the previsions of the Licinian and Mucian law, was any prosecution instituted against any one of those men of the federate states who had had the freedom of the city conferred on him?
For Titus Matrinius, of Spoletum, one of those men whom Caius Marius had presented with the freedom of the city, was indeed prosecuted, being a man of a Latin colony, which was among the first for vigour and high character.
And when Lucius Antistius, a very eloquent man, prosecuted him, he never said that the people of Spoletum had not ratified the deed of Marius; for he saw that states were accustomed to ratify laws which concerned their own rights, not those which affected ours.
But as colonies had not been established by the law of Appuleius, by which law Saturninus had carried, in favour of Marius, a proposition that he should have authority to make three Roman citizens in every colony, he said that this power which was so granted could have no validity, since the case for which it had been intended to provide did not exist.
There is no resemblance to this case in the present prosecution.
But still so great was the authority of Caius Marius, that he did not employ true oratory of Lucius Crassus his own relation, a man of extraordinary eloquence, but himself in a few words defended his conduct with the weight and wisdom which belonged to him, and proved his case to everybody's satisfaction.
For who could there be, O judges who would wish that the power of selecting men for distinction on account of their valour in war, in the line of battle, and in the army, should be taken from our generals; or that all hope of rewards for the energy shown in defending the republic should be taken from our allies, and from the federate states?
But if the countenance of Caius Marius, and his voice, if that quickness of eye so advantageous to a general, if his recent triumphs, and the authority of his presence, had such influence, then let his authority, and his exploits, and his memory, and the undying name of that most illustrious man, prevail still.
Let there be this difference between agreeable citizens and brave ones, that the former, while living, may have all the enjoyment of their influence, but that the authority of the latter may flourish without decay even after they are dead themselves, (if indeed any defender of this empire can be properly said to die at all.)
What? Did not Cnaeus Pompeius, the father of this man, after he had performed mighty achievements in the Italian war, present Publius Caesius, a Roman knight and a virtuous man, who is still alive, a native of Ravenna, a city of a federate state, with the freedom of the city of Rome?
What? did he not give the same gift also to two entire troops of the Camertines?
What? Did not Publius Crassus, that most distinguished man, give the same gift to Alexas, the Heraclean, a man of that city with which there was a treaty, such as I may almost say there is no other instance of, made in the time of Pyrrhus, by Caius Fabricius, the consul?
What? did not Sulla do the same to Aristo of Massilia?
What? Since we are speaking of the people of Gades, did not that same man make nine men of the citizens of Gades, citizens of Rome at the same time?
What? Did not that most scrupulously correct man, that most conscientious and modest man, Quintus Metellus Pius, give the freedom of the city to Quintus Fabius, of Saguntum?
What? Did not this very man who is here in court, by whom all these cases, which I am now lightly running over, were all most carefully wrought up and set before you; did not Marcus Crassus give the freedom of the city to a man of Aletrium, which is a federate town, Marcus Crassus, I say, a man not only eminent for wisdom and sobriety of conduct but also one who is usually even too sparing in admitting men as citizens of Rome?
And do you now attempt to disparage Cnaeus Pompeius's kindness, or I should rather say, his discretion and conduct, in doing what he had heard that Caius Marius had done; and what he had actually seen done in his own town by Publius Crassus, by Lucius Sulla, by Quintus Metellus; and, though last not least, what he had a family precedent for in his own father?
Nor was Cornelius the only instance of his doing this.
For he also presented Hasdrubal, of Saguntum, after that important war in Africa, and several of the Mamertines who came across him, and some of the inhabitants of Utica, and the Fabii from Saguntum, with the freedom of the city.
In truth, as those men are worthy of all other rewards too who defend our republic with their personal exertions and at the expense of their own personal danger, so certainly those men are of all others the most worthy of being presented with the freedom of the city in defence of which they have encountered dangers and wounds.
And I wish that those men in all quarters of the world who are the defenders of this empire, could all enter this city as citizens, and, on the other hand, that all the enemies of the republic could be got rid or out of it.
Nor, indeed did that great poet of our country intend that exhortation which he put into the mouth of Hannibal to be peculiarly his language, but rather the common address of all generals "
The man who slays a foe, whate'er his race, Come whence he will, I call my countryman.
" And from what country an ally comes, all men consider and always have considered unimportant.
Therefore, they have at all times adopted brave men as citizens from all quarters, and have often preferred the valour of men who may have been meanly born to the inactivity of the nobility.
You have before you the interpretation put upon the law and upon treaties by the most consummate generals, by the wisest men and the most illustrious citizens.
I will add now that given by the judges who presided at this investigation; I will add that of the whole Roman people; I will add the most conscientious and sensible decision of the senate.
When the judges were stating openly and were explaining without any disguise what they intended to decide with respect to the Papian law in the case of Marcus Crassus, when the Mamertines claimed him back as a citizen of theirs, the Mamertines, though they had commenced the cause under the sanction of the public authority of their state abandoned it.
Many men who had been admitted to the freedom of this city from the free states, or the federate cities, were released from all apprehension on the subject.
No one was ever prosecuted on account of his rights as a citizen, either because his own state had not ratified his admission, or because his right to change his city was hindered by any treaty.
I will venture also to assert even this, that no one ever lost his action who was proved to have been presented with the freedom of the city by any one of our generals.
Listen now to the decision of the Roman people given on many different occasions, and approved of in the most important causes, in consequence both of the facts of the case, and of precedent.
Who is there that does not know that a treaty was made with all the Latins in the consulship of Spurius Cassius and Postumus Cominius?
Which, indeed, we recollect to have been in existence till quite lately, engraved and written on a brazen column at the back of the rostra.
How then was Lucius Cossinius, a man of Tibur, the father of our present Roman knight of the same name, a most excellent and most accomplished man, after Titus Caelius had been condemned; and how was Titus Coponius, of the same city, he also being a citizen of the very greatest virtue and dignity, (his grandsons Titus and Caius Coponius you are all acquainted with,) after Caius Masso had been condemned, made a Roman citizen?
Are we going to affirm that the path to the freedom of the city is open to eloquence and genius, but shall not be open to courage and virtue?
Was it lawful for the federate states to acquire spoils from us, and shall it not be lawful for them to carry them off from the enemy?
Or shall it be impossible for them to acquire by fighting what they are enabled to acquire by speaking?
Or did our ancestors intend that the rewards of a prosecutor should be greater than those of a warrior?
But if by that most severe Servilian law, the chief men of the city, men of the greatest dignity, citizens of the most profound wisdom, allowed this road to the freedom of the city to be opened, in accordance with the resolution of the people, to the Latins, that is to say to the federate states, and if this was found no fault with by the Licinian and Mucian law, especially when the very nature and name of a prosecution, and the reward which no one could obtain except through the misfortune of some senator, could not be over pleasant either to a senator or to any virtuous man; was it possible to doubt that the decisions of our generals were to be of force with respect to that kind of reward in which the decisions of the judges had already been ratified?
Do we suppose, then, that the sanction of the Latin tribes was given to the Servilian law, or to the other laws in which the reward of the freedom of the city was held out to men of the Latin towns, as an encouragement to such and such conduct?
Listen now to the decision of the senate, which has at all times been approved of by the decision of the people.
Our ancestors, O judges, ordained that the sacred rites of Ceres should be performed with the very strictest religious reverence and the greatest solemnity; which, as they had been originally derived from the Greeks, had always been conducted by Greek priestesses, and were called Greek rites.
But when they were selecting a priestess from Greece to teach us that Greek sacred ceremony, and to perform it, still they thought it right that it should be a citizen who was sacrificing for citizens, in order that she might pray to the immortal gods with knowledge, indeed, derived from a distant and foreign source but with feelings belonging to one of our own people and citizens.
I see that these priestesses were for the most part Neapolitans or Velians, and those are notoriously federate cities.
I am not speaking of any ancient cases, I am only mentioning things that have happened lately, as, for instance, that before the freedom of the city was conferred on the Velians, Caius Valerius Flaccus being the city praetor, did, in accordance with a resolution passed by the senate, submit a motion to the people concerning a woman of Velia, called Calliphana, mentioning her expressly by name, for the purpose of making her a Roman citizen.
Are we then to suppose that the Velians ratified the law which was then passed about her; or that that priestess was not made a Roman citizen; or that the treaty was violated by the senate and people of Rome?
I am aware, O judges, that in a cause that is so plain and so little liable to any doubt, many more arguments have been adduced and more men of great experience have spoken than the case at all required.
But that has been done, not in order by our speaking to prove to you a matter which required proof so little, but in order to check the hostile disposition of all spiteful, and wicked, and envious men, whom the prosecutor has sought to inflame, hoping that some of the reports current among men who grieve over the prosperity of another might reach your ears, and have their effect on the result of this trial; and on that account you saw aspersions scattered about with great art in every part of his speech; especially with respect to the riches of Lucius Cornelius, which do not deserve to be brought into odium, and which, whatever their amount may be, are such as to seem to have been rather acquired by care than by any illicit or unfair means; and with respect to his luxury, which he attacked, not by bringing any definite charge of licentiousness against him, but by mere general abuse.
Then, too, he attacked him about his farm at Tusculum, which he recollected had belonged to Quintus Metellus, and to Lucius Crassus; but he was not aware that Crassus had bought it of a man who was a freedman, Sotericus Marcius by name; that it had come to Metellus as part of the property of Venonius Vindicius; and also, he did not know that lands do not belong to any particular family, that they are accustomed to pass by sale to strangers, often even to the very lowest people, not being protected by the laws like guardianships.
It has been imputed to him also that he has become one of the tribe Crustumina, a privilege which he obtained by means of the law concerning bribery, and which is less invidious than the advantages acquired by those men who, by the assistance of the laws, obtain the power of delivering their opinion as praetor, and of wearing the praetexta.
And then, too, the adoption of Theophanus was discussed; by means of which Cornelius gained nothing beyond being confirmed in his possession of the inheritances of his own relations.
Although it is not a very difficult matter to propitiate the minds of those men who themselves are envious of Cornelius.
They show their envy in the ordinary way; they attack him at their feasts; they abuse him at their conversations; they carp at him, not in a downright hostile spirit, but in a disparaging manner.
They who are enemies to the friends of Lucius Cornelius, or who envy them, are much more greatly to be feared by him.
For who has ever been found who would confess himself an enemy to the man himself? Or who could be so with any reason?
What good man has he not cultivated the friendship of? Who is there whose fortune and dignity he has not promoted?
Living in the closest intimacy with the most influential man in the state, at a time of our greatest misfortunes and most bitter dissensions, he has never offended any one of either party, either by act or word, or even by a look.
It was my fate, or the fate of the republic, that the whole weight of distress and ill-will at that time should fall upon me alone.
Cornelius was so far from exulting in my disasters or in your dissensions, that while I was absent, he aided all my friends with his kind assistance, with his tears, with his exertions, and with consolation.
And I have been induced by their testimony in his behalf, and by their entreaties, to offer him my service now, which he has so well deserved, and which on my part is only a repayment of just and reasonable gratitude.
And I hope, O judges, as you love and consider dear to you those men who were the chief agents in my preservation and safety, and in the restoration of my dignity, that so also the things which were done by this man to the extent of his power and of the opportunities which were afforded him, will be grateful to and approved of by you.
He, then, is not now attacked by his own enemies, for he has none, but by those of his friends; enemies who are both numerous and powerful; men whom yesterday Cnaeus Pompeius, in a very eloquent and dignified oration, desired to come forward and contend with him if they chose, but to abandon the unequal contest and unjust persecution which they were carrying on against this man.
And it was a fair condition, and one very advantageous, O judges, for us and for all those who are connected with us in intimacy that we should carry on our own enmities against one another as we chose, but that we should spare the friends of our enemies.
And if my authority had in this matter much weight with those men, especially as they see that I am well instructed in such matters both by the variety of circumstances in which I have found myself, and by special experience in cases of this sort, I would exhort them to give up even those greater dissensions.
For I have at all times considered it the part both of fearless citizens and of virtuous men to labour in the administration of the affairs of the republic in such a way as to defend whatever one really thinks best; nor have I myself ever failed in this labour or duty or line of exertion.
But contention is only wise so long as it either does some good or, if it does not do any good, at all events does no harm to the state.
We ourselves have had wishes, we have urged points, we have tried to carry measures, and we have not succeeded.
Other men have felt indignation; we have undergone real sorrow and distress.
Why should we choose to destroy those things which exist rather than to preserve them if merely because we are not allowed to alter them exactly as we wish?
The senate complimented Caius Caesar with the most honourable distinction of a supplication lasting for a number of days which was quite unprecedented.
The senate again, though at a time when the treasury was in great difficulties, gave his victorious army a large sum for pay, appointed ten lieutenants to assist the commander-in-chief at his request, and by the Sempronian law decided not to send any one to supersede him.
Of all these resolutions, I was the prime mover and the chief author; nor did I think myself bound to preserve a consistency with the previous differences which I had had with him, rather than to consult what was advantageous with regard to the present necessities of the republic and to unanimity.
Other men may perhaps think differently.
They are, maybe, firmer in their opinions.
I find fault with no one; but I do not agree with all of them.
Nor do I think it any proof of inconsistency to regulate one's opinions, as one would do a ship or a ship's course on a voyage, according to the weather which might be prevailing in the republic.
But if there be any people who never abandon any dislike which they have ever conceived against anybody, (and I see that there are some such people,) then let them fight with the leaders themselves, not with their train and followers.
Some of them, perhaps, will consider that conduct obstinacy, and some will think it courage; but this attacking of the subordinate parties all will look upon as injustice, mixed with some little cruelty.
But if there be some men, O judges, whose minds we cannot propitiate by any means whatever, at all events we feel sure that your inclinations are favourable to us, not because of our speeches, but because of your own natural humanity.
For, what reason is there why the intimate friendship of Caesar should not avail to procure this my client the highest praise rather than the very slightest injury?
Caesar knew him when a young man; he, that most able man, thought highly of him, and though he had a most excessive multitude of friends, Balbus was accounted by him one of his most intimate friends of all.
In his praetorship and in his consulship he appointed him prefect of the engineers; he thought highly of his prudence, he loved him for his integrity, he was grateful to him for his constant assistance and attention.
He was at different times the partner of very many of his labours; he is perhaps even now the partaker of some of his benefits.
And if they are to be an injury to my client in your judgment, I do not see what is ever to be an advantage to any one before such judges.
But since Caius Caesar is a great distance off, and is now in those places which, if we regard their situation, are the boundaries of the world, or, if we regard his exploits, of the Roman empire, do not, I entreat you, in the name of the immortal gods, O judges, do not allow such bitter news to be taken to him, as that his own prefect of engineers, the man of all others most dear to and most intimate with him, is crushed by your decision, not on account of any offence of his own, but because of his intimacy with him.
Pity the man who is now before the court at his own peril, not on account of any offence of his own, but because of the action of this great and most illustrious man, who is contesting not any charge which is brought against him, but a point of public law and of general interest.
And if Cnaeus Pompeius, and Publius Crassus, and Quintus Metellus, and Cnaeus Pompeius the father of this man, and Lucius Sulla, and Marcus Crassus, and Caius Marius, and the senate and people of Rome and all those who have ever given a decision under similar circumstances and the federate states, and the allies and those ancient men of the Latin tribes whom I have mentioned are all ignorant of this law, consider whether it may not be more advantageous and honourable for you to err with those men for your guides than to be rightly instructed with this man for your teacher.
But if you see that you are now come to a decision about a law which is certain and clear and advantageous and well established and determined, then beware of establishing any new principle in a case which has been so loud and so repeatedly decided on.
And at the same time, O judges, place all these considerations before you: first of all, that all those most illustrious men who have ever given any man of a federate city the freedom of this city are now on their trial after death; secondly, that the senate is so too, which has repeatedly decided in favour of such an act and the people which has voted it and the judges who have approved of it.
Then consider this also that Cornelius does live and always has lived in such a manner that though investigations are appointed for every imaginable offence, still he is now brought before the court, not for the sake of any punishment which is sought to be inflicted on his vices, but for that at the rewards which have been conferred on his virtue.
Add this consideration also; that you by your decision are about to determine whether you choose that for the future the friendship of illustrious men should be a calamity to men, or an ornament.
Lastly of all, O judges, keep this fixed in your minds, that in this action you are about to decide, not on any crime imputed to Lucius Cornelius, but on a kindness shown by Cnaeus Pompeius.
If any one of you, O judges, or of these who are present here, marvels perhaps at me, that I, who have for so many years been occupied in public causes and trials in such a manner that I have defended many men but have prosecuted no one could now on a sudden change my usual purpose, and descend to act as accuser;
he, if he becomes acquainted with the cause and reason of my present intention, will both approve of what I am doing, and will think, I am sure, that no one ought to be preferred to me as manager of this cause.
As I had been quaestor in Sicily, O judges, and had departed for that province so as to leave among all the Sicilians a pleasing and lasting recollection of my quaestorship and of my name, it happened, that while they thought their chief protection lay in many of their ancient patrons, they thought there was also some support for their fortunes secured in me,
who, being now plundered and harassed, have all frequently come to me by the public authority, entreating me to undertake the cause and the defence of all their fortunes.
They say that I repeatedly promised and repeatedly assured them, that, if any time should arrive when they wanted anything of me, I would not be wanting to their service.
They said that the time had come for me to defend not only the advantages they enjoyed, but even the life and safety of the whole province, that they had now not even any gods in their cities to whom they could flee, because Caius Verres had carried off their most sacred images from the very holiest temples.
That whatever luxury could accomplish in the way of vice, cruelty in the way of punishment, avarice in the way of plunder, or arrogance in the way of insult, had all been borne by them for the last three years, while this one man was praetor.
That they begged and entreated that I would not reject them as suppliants, who, while I was in safety, ought to be suppliants to no one.
I was vexed and distressed, O judges, at being brought into such a strait, as to be forced either to let those men's hopes deceive them who had entreated succour and assistance of me, or else, when I had from my very earliest youth devoted myself entirely to defending men, to be now, under the compulsion of the occasion and of my duty, transferred to the part of an accuser.
I told them that they had an advocate in Quintus Caecilius, who had been quaestor in the same province after I was quaestor there.
But the very thing which I thought would have been an assistance to me in getting rid of this difficulty, was above all things a hindrance to me; for they would have much more easily excused me if they had not known him, or if he had never been among them as quaestor.
I was induced, O judges, by the considerations of duty, good faith, and pity; by the example of many good men; by the ancient customs and habits of our ancestors, to think that I ought to take upon myself this burden of labour and duty, not for any purpose of my own, but in the time of need to my friends.
In which business, however, this fact consoles me, O judges, that this pleading of mine which seems to be an accusation is not to be considered an accusation, but rather a defence.
For I am defending many men, many cities, the whole province of Sicily.
So that, if one person is to be accused by me, I still almost appear to remain firm in my original purpose, and not entirely to have given up defending and assisting men.
But if I had this cause so deserving, so illustrious, and so important; if either the Sicilians had not demanded this of me, or I had not had such an intimate connection with the Sicilians; and if I were to profess that what I am doing I am doing for the sake of the republic, in order that a man endowed with unprecedented covetousness, audacity, and wickedness, whose thefts and crimes we have known to be most enormous and most infamous, not in Sicily alone, but in Achaia, in Asia, in Cilicia, in Pamphylia, and even at Rome, before the eyes of all men, should be brought to trial by my instrumentality, still, who would there be who could find fault with my act or my intention?
What is there, in the name of gods and men! by which I can at the present moment confer a greater benefit on the republic?
What is there which either ought to be more pleasing to the Roman people, or which can be more desirable in the eves of the allies and of foreign nations, or more adapted to secure the safety and fortunes of all men?
The provinces depopulated, harassed, and utterly overturned; the allies and tributaries of the Roman people afflicted and miserable, are seeking now not for any hope of safety, but for comfort in their destruction.
They who wish the administration of justice still to remain in the hands of the senatorial body, complain that they cannot procure proper accusers; those who are able to act as accusers, complain of the want of impartiality in the decisions.
In the meantime the Roman people, although it suffers under many disadvantages and difficulties, yet desires nothing in the republic so much as the restoration of the ancient authority and importance to the courts of law.
It is from a regret at the state of our courts of law that the restoration of the power of the tribunes is so eagerly demanded again.
It is in consequence of the uncertainty of the courts of law, that another class is demanded to determine law-suits; owing to the crimes and infamy of the judges, even the office of censor, which formerly was used to be accounted too severe by the people, is now again demanded, and has become popular and praiseworthy.
In a time of such licentiousness on the part of the wicked, of daily complaint on the part of the Roman people, of dishonour in the courts of law, of unpopularity of the whole senate, as I thought that this was the only remedy for these numerous evils, for men who were both capable and upright to undertake the cause of the republic and the laws, I confess that I, for the sake of promoting the universal safety, devoted myself to upholding that part of the republic which was in the greatest danger.
Now that I have shown the motives by which I was influenced to undertake the cause, I must necessarily speak of our contention, that, in appointing an accuser, you may have some certain line of conduct to follow.
I understand the matter thus, O judges: when any man is accused of extortion, if there be a contest between any parties as to who may best be entrusted with the prosecution, these two points ought to be regarded most especially; first, whom they, to whom the injury is said to have been done, wish most to be their counsel; and secondly, whom he, who is accused of having done those injuries, would least wish to be so.
In this cause, O judges, although I think both these points plain, yet I will dilate upon each, and first on that which ought to have the greatest influence with you, that is to say, on the inclination of those to whom the injuries have been done; of those for whose sake this trial for extortion has been instituted.
Caius Verres is said for three years to have depopulated the province of Sicily, to have desolated the cities of the Sicilians, to have made the houses empty, to have plundered the temples.
The whole nation of the Sicilians is present, and complains of this.
They fly for protection to my good faith, which they have proved and long known; they entreat assistance for themselves from you and from the laws of the Roman people through my instrumentality; they desire me to be their defender in these their calamities; they desire me to be the avenger of their injuries, the advocate of their rights, and the pleader of their whole cause.
Will you, O Quintus Caecilius, say this, that I have not approached the cause at the request of the Sicilians? or that the desire of those most excellent and most faithful allies ought not to be of great influence with these judges?
If you dare to say that which Caius Verres, whose enemy you are pretending to be, wishes especially to be believed, that the Sicilians did not make this request to me, you will in the first place be supporting the cause of your enemy, against whom it is considered that no vague presumption, but that an actual decision has been come to, in the fact that has become notorious, that all the Sicilians have begged for me as their advocate against his injuries.
If you, his enemy, deny that this is the case, which he himself to whom the fact is most injurious does not dare to deny, take care lest you seem to carry on your enmity in too friendly a manner.
In the second place, there are witnesses, the most illustrious men of our state, all of whom it is not necessary that I should name, those who are present I will appeal to; while, if I were speaking falsely, they are the men whom I should least wish to be witnesses of my impudence.
He, who is one of the assessors on this bid, Caius Marcellus, knows it; he, whom I see here present, Cnaeus Lentulus Marcellinus, knows it; on whose good faith and protection the Sicilians principally depend, because the whole of that province is inalienably connected with the name of the Marcelli.
These men know that this request was not only made to me, but that it was made so frequently and with such earnestness, that I had no alternative except either to undertake the cause, or to repudiate the duty of friendship.
But why do I cite these men as witnesses, as if the matter were doubtful or unknown?
Most noble men are present here from the whole province, who being present, beg and entreat you, O judges, not to let your judgment differ from their judgment in selecting an advocate for their cause.
Deputations from every city in the whole of Sicily, except two, are present; and if deputations from those two were present also, two of the very most serious of the crimes would be lessened in which these cities are implicated with Caius Verres.
But why have they entreated this protection from me above all men?
If it were doubtful whether they had entreated it from me or not, I could tell why they had entreated it; but now, when it is so evident that you can see it with your eyes, I know not why it should be any injury to me to have it imputed to me that I was selected above all men.
But I do not arrogate any such thing to myself, and I not only do not say it, but I do not wish even to leave any one to believe that I have been preferred to every possible advocate.
That is not the fact but a consideration of the opportunities of each individual and of his health, and of his aptitude for conducting this cause, has been taken into account.
My desire and sentiments on this matter have always been these, that I would rather that any one of those who are fit for it should undertake it than I; but I had rather that I should undertake it myself than that no one should.
The next thing is, since it is evident that the Sicilians have demanded this of me, for us to inquire whether it is right that this fact should have any influence on you and on your judgments; whether the allies of the Roman people, your suppliants, ought to have any weight with you in a matter of extortion committed on themselves.
And why need I say much on such a point as this?
as if there were any doubt that the whole law about extortion was established for the sake of the allies.
For when citizens have been robbed of their money, it is usually sought to be recovered by civil action and by a private suit.
This is a law affecting the allies, this is a right of foreign nations.
They have this fortress somewhat less strongly fortified now than it was formerly, but still if there be any hope left which can console the minds of the allies, it is all placed in this law.
And strict guardians of this law have long since been required, not only by the Roman people, but by the most distant nations.
Who then is there who can deny that it is right that the trial should be conducted according to the wish of those men for whose sake the law has been established?
All Sicily, if it could speak with one voice, would say this: "All the gold, all the silver, all the ornaments which were in my cities, in my private houses, or in my temples, all the rights which I had in any single thing by the kindness of the senate and Roman people, all that you, O Caius Verres, have taken away and robbed me of, on which account I demand of you a hundred million of sesterces according to the law."
If the whole province, as I have said, could speak, it would say this, and as it could not speak, it has of its own accord chosen an advocate to urge these points, whom it has thought suitable.
In a matter of this sort, will any one be found so impudent as to dare to approach or to aspire to the conduct of the cause of others against the will of those very people whose affairs are involved in it?
If, O Quintus Caecilius, the Sicilians were to say this to you, we do not know you we know not who you are, we never saw you before; allow us to defend our fortunes through the instrumentality of that man whose good faith is known to us; would they not be saying what would appear reasonable to every one?
But now they say this that they know both the men, that they wish one of them to be the defender of their cause, that they are wholly unwilling that the other should be.
Even if they were silent they would say plainly enough why they are unwilling.
But they are not silent; and yet will you offer yourself, when they are most unwilling to accept you!
Will you still persist in speaking in the cause of others?
Will you still defend those men who would rather be deserted by every one than defended by you?
Will you still promise your assistance to those men who do neither believe that you wish to give it for their sake, nor that, if you did wish it, you could do it?
Why do you endeavour to take away from them by force the little hope for the remainder of their fortunes which they still retain, built upon the impartiality of the law and of this tribunal?
Why do you interpose yourself expressly against the will of those whom the law directs to be especially consulted?
Why do you now openly attempt to ruin the whole fortunes of those of whom you did not deserve very well when in the province?
Why do you take away from them, not only the power of prosecuting their rights, but even of bewailing their calamities?
If you are their counsel, whom do you expect to come forward of those men who are now striving, not to punish some one else by your means, but to avenge themselves on you yourself, through the instrumentality of some one or other?
But this is a well established fact, that the Sicilians especially desire to have me for their counsel; the other point, no doubt, is less clear, namely, by whom Verres would least like to be prosecuted!
Did any one ever strive so openly for any honour, or so earnestly for his own safety, as that man and his friends have striven to prevent this prosecution from being entrusted to me?
There are many qualities which Verres believes to be in me, and which he knows, O Quintus Caecilius, do not exist in you: and what qualities each of us have I will mention presently;
at this moment I will only say this, which you must silently agree to, that there is no quality in me which he can despise, and none in you which he can fear.
Therefore, that great defender and friend of his votes for you and opposes me; he openly solicits the judges to have you preferred to me; and he says that he does this honestly, without any envy of me, and without any dislike to me.
For, says he, "I am now asking for that which I usually obtain when I strive for it earnestly.
I am not asking to have the defendant acquitted; but I am asking this, that he may be accused by the one man rather than by the other.
Grant me this; grant that which is easy to grant, and honourable, and by no means invidious; and when you have granted that, you will, without any risk to yourself, and without any discredit, have granted that he shall be acquitted in whose cause I am labouring."
He says also, in order that some alarm may be mingled with the exertion of his influence, that there are certain men on the bench to whom he wishes their tablets to be shown, and that that is very easy, for that they do not give their votes separately, but that all vote together; and that a tablet, covered with the proper wax, and not with that illegal wax which has given so much scandal, is given to every one.
And he does not give himself all this trouble so much for the sake of Verres, as because he disapproves of the whole affair.
For he sees that, if the power of prosecuting is taken away from the high-born boys whom he has hitherto played with, and from the public informers, whom he has always despised and thought insignificant (not without good reason), and to be transferred to fearless men of well-proved constancy, he will no longer be able to domineer over the courts of law as he pleases.
I now beforehand give this man notice, that if you determine that this cause shall be conducted by me, his whole plan of defence must be altered, and must be altered in such a manner as to be carried on in a more honest and honourable way than he likes; that he must imitate those most illustrious men whom he himself has seen, Lucius Crassus and Marcus Antonius; who thought that they had no right to bring anything to the trials and causes in which their friends were concerned, except good faith and ability.
He shall have no room for thinking, if I conduct the case, that the tribunal can be corrupted without great danger to many.
In this trial I think that the cause of the Sicilian nation, that the cause of the whole Roman people, is undertaken by me; so that I have not to crush one worthless man alone, which is what the Sicilians have requested, but to extinguish and extirpate every sort of iniquity, which is what the Roman people has been long demanding.
And how far I labour in this cause, or what I may be able to effect, I would rather leave to the expectations of others, than set forth in my own oration.
But as for you, O Caecilius, what can you do?
On what occasion, or in what affair, have you, I will not say given proof to others of your powers! but even made trial of yourself to yourself?
Has it never occurred to you how important a business it is to uphold a public cause? to lay bare the whole life of another? and to bring it palpably before, not only the minds of the judges, but before the very eyes and sight of all men; to defend the safety of the allies, the interests of the provinces, the authority of the laws, and the dignity of the judgment-seat?
Judge by me, since this is the first opportunity of learning it that you have ever had, how many qualities must meet in that man who is the accuser of another: and if you recognise any one of these in yourself, I will, of my own accord, yield up to you that which you are desirous of.
First of all, he must have a singular integrity and innocence.
For there is nothing which is less tolerable than for him to demand an account of his life from another who cannot give an account of his own.
Here I will not say any more of yourself.
This one thing, I think, all may observe, that up to this time you had no opportunity of becoming known to any people except to the Sicilians; and that the Sicilians say this, that even though they are exasperated against the same man, whose enemy you say that you are, still, if you are the advocate, they will not appear on the trial.
Why they refuse to, you will not hear from me.
Allow these judges to suspect what it is inevitable that they must.
The Sicilians, indeed, being a race of men over-acute, and too much inclined to suspiciousness, suspect that you do not wish to bring documents from Sicily against Verres; but, as both his praetorship and your quaestorship are recorded in the same documents, they suspect that you wish to remove them out of Sicily.
In the second place, an accuser must be trustworthy and veracious.
Even if I were to think that you were desirous of being so, I easily see that you are not able to be so.
Nor do I speak of these things, which, if I were to mention, you would not be able to invalidate, namely that you, before you departed from Sicily, had become reconciled to Verres; that Potamo, your secretary and intimate friend, was retained by Verres in the province when you left it; that Marcus Caecilius, your brother, a most exemplary and accomplished young man, is not only not present here and does not stand by you while prosecuting your alleged injuries, but that he is with Verres, and is living on terms of the closest friendship and intimacy with him.
These, and other things belonging to you, are many signs of a false accuser; but these I do not now avail myself of.
I say this, that you, if you were to wish it ever so much, still cannot be a faithful accuser.
For I see that there are many charges in which you are so implicated with Verres, that in accusing him, you would not dare to touch upon them.
All Sicily complains that Caius Verres, when he had ordered grain to be brought into his granary for him, and when a bushel of wheat was two sesterces, demanded of the farmers twelve sesterces a bushel for wheat.
It was a great crime, an immense sum, an impudent theft, an intolerable injustice.
I must inevitably convict him of this charge; what will you do, O Caecilius?
Will you pass over this serious accusation, or will you bring it forward?
If you bring it forward, will you charge that as a crime against another, which you did yourself at the same time in the same province?
Will you dare so to accuse another, that you cannot avoid at the same time condemning yourself?
If you omit the charge, what sort of a prosecution will yours be, which from fear of danger to yourself, is afraid not only to create a suspicion of a most certain and enormous crime, but even to make the least mention of it?
Grain was bought, on the authority of a decree of the senate, of the Sicilians while Verres was praetor; for which grain all the money was not paid.
This is a grave charge against Verres; a grave one if I plead the cause, but, if you are the prosecutor, no charge at all.
For you were the quaestor, you had the handling of the public money; and, even if the praetor desired it ever so much, yet it was to a great extent in your power to prevent anything being taken from it.
Of this crime, therefore, if you are the prosecutor, no mention will be made.
And so during the whole trial nothing will be said of his most enormous and most notorious thefts and injuries.
Believe me, O Caecilius, he who is connected with the criminal in a partnership of iniquity, cannot really defend his associates while accusing him.
The contractors exacted money from the cities instead of grain.
Well! was this never done except in the praetorship of Verres?
I do not say that, but it was done while Caecilius was quaestor.
What then will you do?
Will you urge against this man as a charge, what you both could and ought to have prevented from being done? or will you leave out the whole of it?
Verres, then, at his trial will absolutely never hear at all of those things, which, when he was doing them, he did not know how he should be able to defend.
And I am mentioning those matters which lie on the surface.
There are other acts of plunder more secret, which he, in order, I suppose, to check the courage and delay the attack of Caecilius, has very kindly participated in with his quaestor.
You know that information of these matters has been given to me; and if I were to choose to mention them, all men would easily perceive that there was not only a perfect harmony of will subsisting between you both, but that you did not pursue even your plunder separately.
So that if you demand to be allowed to give information of the crimes which Verres has committed in conjunction with you, I have no objection, if it is allowed by the law.
But if we are speaking of conducting the prosecution, that you must yield ta those who are hindered by no crimes of their own from being able to prove the offences of another.
And see how much difference there will be between my accusation and yours.
I intend to charge Verres with all the crimes that you committed, though he had no share in them, because he did not prevent you from committing them, though he had the supreme power;
you, on the other hand, will not allege against him even the crimes which he committed himself, lest you should be found to be in any particular connected with him.
What shall I say of these other points, O Caecilius?
Do these things appear contemptible to you, without which no cause, especially no cause of such importance, can by any means be supported?
Have you any talent for pleading? any practice in speaking? Have you paid any attention or acquired any acquaintance with the forum, the courts, and the laws?
I know in what a rocky and difficult path I am now treading; for as all arrogance is odious, so a conceit of one's abilities and eloquence is by far the most disagreeable of all.
On which account I say nothing of my own abilities; for I have none worth speaking of, and if I had I would not speak of them.
For either the opinion formed of me is quite sufficient for me, such as it is; or if it be too low an opinion to please me, still I cannot make it higher by talking about them.
I will just, O Caecilius, say this much familiarly to you about yourself, forgetting for a moment this rivalry and contest of ours.
Consider again and again what your own sentiments are, and recollect yourself; and consider who you are, and what you are able to effect.
Do you think that, when you have taken upon yourself the cause of the allies, and the fortunes of the province, and the rights of the Roman people, and the dignity of the judgment-seat and of the law, in a discussion of the most important and serious matters, you are able to support so many affairs and those so weighty and so various with your voice, your memory, your counsel, and your ability?
Do you think that you are able to distinguish in separate charges, and in a well-arranged speech, all that Caius Verres has done in his quaestorship, and in his lieutenancy, and in his praetorship, at Rome, or in Italy, or in Achaia, or in Asia Minor, or in Pamphylia, as the actions themselves are divided by place and time?
Do you think that you are able (and this is especially necessary against a defendant of this sort) to cause the things which he has done licentiously, or wickedly, or tyrannically, to appear just as bitter and scandalous to those who hear of them, as they did appear to those who felt them?
Those things which I am speaking of are very important, believe me.
Do not you despise this either; everything must be related, and demonstrated, and explained; the cause must be not merely stated, but it must also be gravely and copiously dilated on.
You must cause, if you wish really to do and to effect anything, men not only to hear you, but also to hear you willingly and eagerly.
And if nature kind been bountiful to you in such qualities, and if from your childhood you had studied the best arts and systems, and worked hard at them; if you had learnt Greek literature at Athens, not at Lilybaeum, and Latin literature at Rome, and not in Sicily; still it would be a great undertaking to approach so important a cause, and one about which there is such great expectation, and having approached it, to follow it up with the requisite diligence; to have all the particulars always fresh in your memory; to discuss it properly in your speech, and to support it adequately with your voice and your faculties.
Perhaps you may say, What then?
Are you then endowed with all these qualifications?
I wish indeed that I were;
but at all events I have laboured with great industry from my very childhood to attain them.
And if I, on account of the importance and difficulty of such a study have not been able to attain them, who have done nothing else all my life, how far do you think that you must be distant from these qualities, which you have not only never thought of before, but which even now, when you are entering on a stage that requires them all, you can form no proper idea of, either as for their nature or as to their importance?
I, who as all men know, am so much concerned in the forum and the courts of justice, that there is no one of the same age, or very few, who have defended more causes, and who spend all my time which can be spared from the business of my friends in these studies and labours, in order that I may be more prepared for forensic practice and more ready at it,
yet, (may the gods be favourable to me as I am saying what is true!) whenever the thought occurs to me of the day when the defendant having been summoned, I have to speak, I am not only agitated in my mind, but a shudder runs over my whole body.
Even now I am surveying in my mind and thoughts what party spirit will be shown by men; what throngs of men will meet; how great an expectation the importance of the trial will excite; how greet a multitude of hearers the infamy of Caius Verres will collect; how great an audience for my speech his wickedness will draw together
And when I think of these things, even now I am afraid as to what I shall be able to say suitable to the hatred men bear him who are inimical and hostile to him, and worthy of the expectation which all men will form, and of the importance of the case.
Do you fear nothing, do you think of nothing, are you anxious about nothing of all this?
Or if from some old speech you have been able to learn, "I entreat the mighty and beneficent Jupiter," or, "I wish it were possible, O judges," or something of the sort, do you think that you shall come before the court in an admirable state of preparation?
And, even if no one were to answer you, yet you would not, as I think, be able to state and prove even the cause itself.
Do you now never give it a thought, that you will have a contest with a most eloquent man, and one in a perfect state of preparation for speaking, with whom you will at one time have to argue, and at another time to strive and contend against him with all your might?
Whose abilities indeed I praise greatly, but not so as to be afraid of them, and think highly of, thinking however at the same time that I am more easily to be pleased by them than cajoled by them.
He will never put me down by his acuteness; he will never put me out of countenance by any artifice; he will never attempt to upset and dispirit me by displays of his genius.
I know all the modes of attack and every system of speaking the man has.
We have often been employed on the same, often on opposite sides.
Ingenious as he is, he will plead against me as if he were aware that his own ability is to same extent put on its trial.
But as for you, O Caecilius, I think that I see already how he will play with you, how he will bandy you about; how often he will give you power and option of choosing which alternative you please, whether a thing were done or not, whether a thing be true or false; and whichever side you take will be contrary to your interest.
What a heat you will be in, what bewilderment! what darkness, O ye immortal gods! will overwhelm the man, free from malice as he is.
What will you do when he begins to divide the different counts of your accusation, and to arrange on his fingers each separate division of the cause?
What will you do when he begins to deal with each argument, to disentangle it, to get rid of it?
You yourself in truth will begin to be afraid lest you have brought an innocent man into danger.
What will you do when he begins to pity his client, to complain, and to take off some of his unpopularity from him and transfer it to you? to speak of the close connection necessarily subsisting between the quaestor and the praetor? of the custom of the ancients? of the holy nature of the connection between those to whom the same province was by lot appointed?
Will you be able to encounter the odium such a speech will excite against you?
Think a moment; consider again and again.
For there seems to me to be danger of his overwhelming you not with words only, but of his blunting the edge of your genius by the mere gestures and motions of his body, and so distracting you and leading you away from every previous thought and purpose.
And I see that the trial of this will be immediate; for if you are able today to answer me and these things which I am saying; if you even depart one word from that book which some elocution-master or other has given you, made up of other men's speeches; I shall think that you are able to speak, and that you are not unequal to that trial also, and that you will be able to do justice to the cause and to the duty you undertake.
But if in this preliminary skirmish with me you turn out nothing, what can we suppose you will be in the contest itself against a most active adversary?
Be it so; he is nothing himself, he has no ability; but he comes prepared with well-trained and eloquent supporters.
And this too is something, though it is not enough; for in all things he who is the chief person to act, ought to be the most accomplished and the best prepared.
But I see that Lucius Appuleius is the next counsel on the list, a mere beginner, not as to his age indeed, but as to his practice and training in forensic contests.
Next to him he has, as I think, Allienus; he indeed does belong to the bar, but however, I never took any particular notice of what he could do in speaking; in raising an outcry, indeed, I see that he is very vigorous and practiced.
In this man all your hopes are placed; he, if you are appointed prosecutor, will sustain the whole trial.
But even he will not put forth his whole strength in speaking, but will consult your credit and reputation; and will abstain from putting forth the whole power of eloquence which he himself possesses, in order that you may still appear of some importance
As we see is done by the Greek pleaders; that he to whom the second or third part belongs, though he may be able to speak somewhat better than his leader, often restrains himself a good deal, in order that the chief may appear to the greatest possible advantage, so will Allienus act; he will be subservient to you, he will pander to your interest, he will put forth somewhat less strength than he might.
Now consider this, O judges, what sort of accusers we shall have in this most important trial; when Allienus himself will somewhat abstain from displaying all his abilities, if he has any, and Caecilius will only be able to think himself of any use, because Allienus is not so vigorous as he might be, and voluntarily allows him the chief share in the display.
What fourth counsel he is to have with him I do not know, unless it be one of that crowd of losers of time who have entreated to be allowed an inferior part in this prosecution, whoever he might be to whom you gave the lead.
And you are to appear in just this state of preparation, that you have to make friends of those men who are utter strangers to you, for the purpose of obtaining their assistance.
But I will not do these men so much honour as to answer what they have said in any regular order, or to give a separate answer to each; but since I have come to mention them not intentionally, but by chance, I will briefly, as I pass, satisfy them all in a few words.
Do I seem to you to be in such exceeding want of friends that I must have an assistant given me, chosen not out of the men whom I have brought down to court with me, but out of the people at large?
And are you suffering under such a dearth of defendants, that you endeavour to filch this cause from me rather than look for some defendants of your own class at the pillar of Maenius?
Appoint me, says he, to watch Tullius.
What?
How many watchers shall I have need of, if I once allow you to meddle with my bag?
as you will have to be watched not only to prevent your betraying anything, but to prevent your removing anything.
But for the whole matter of that watchman I will answer you thus in the briefest manner possible; that these honest judges will never permit any assistant to force himself against my consent into so important a cause, when it has been undertaken by me, and is entrusted to me.
In truth, my integrity rejects an overlooker; my diligence is afraid of a spy.
But to return to you, O Caecilius, you see how many qualities are wanting to you;
how many belong to you which a guilty defendant would wish to belong to his prosecutor, you are well aware.
What can be said to this?
For I do not ask what you will say yourself, I see that it is not you who will answer me, but this book which your prompter has in his hand; who, if he be inclined to prompt you rightly, will advise you to depart from this place and not to answer me one word.
For what can you say?
That which you are constantly repeating, that Verres has done you an injury?
I have no doubt he has, for it would not be probable, when he was doing injuries to all the Sicilians, that you alone should be so important in his eyes that he should take care of your interests.
But the rest of the Sicilians have found an avenger of their injuries; you, while you are endeavouring to exact vengeance for your injuries by your own means, (which you will not be able to effect,) are acting in a way to leave the injuries of all the rest unpunished and unavenged.
And you do not see that it ought not alone to be considered who is a proper person to exact vengeance, but also who is a person capable of doing so, that if there be a man in whom both these qualifications exist, he is the best man.
But if a man has only one of them, then the question usually asked is, not what he is inclined to do, but what he is able to do.
And if you think that the office of prosecutor ought to be entrusted to him above all other men, to whom Caius Verres has done the greatest injury, which do you think the judges ought to be most indignant at, at your having been injured by him, or at the whole province of Sicily having been harassed and ruined by him?
I think you must grant that this both is the worst thing of the two, and that it ought to be considered the worst by every one.
A flow, therefore, that the province ought to be preferred to you as the prosecutor.
For the province is prosecuting when he is pleading the cause whom the province has adopted as the defender of her rights, the avenger of her injuries, and the pleader of the whole cause.
Oh, but Caius Verres has done you such an injury as might afflict the minds of all the rest of the Sicilians also, though the grievance was felt only by another.
Nothing of the sort.
For I think it is material also to this argument to consider what sort of injury is alleged and brought forward as the cause of your enmity.
Allow me to relate it.
For he indeed, unless he is wholly destitute of sense, will never say what it is.
There is a woman of the name of Agonis, a Lilybaean, a freedwoman of Venus Erycina; a woman who before this man was quaestor was notoriously well off and rich.
From her some prefect of Antonius's carried off some musical slaves whom he said he wished to use in his fleet.
Then she, as is the custom in Sicily for all the slaves of Venus, and all those who have procured their emancipation from her, in order to hinder the designs of the prefect, by the scruples which the name of Venus would raise, said that she and all her property belonged to Venus.
When this was reported to Caecilius, that most excellent and upright man, he ordered Agonis to be summoned before him; he immediately orders a trial to ascertain "if it appeared that she had said that she and all her property belonged to Venus."
The recuperators decide all that was necessary, and indeed there was no doubt at all that she had said so.
He sends men to take possession of the woman's property.
He adjudges her herself to be again a slave of Venus; then he sells her property and confiscates the money.
So while Agonis wishes to keep a few slaves under the name and religious protection of Venus, she loses all her fortunes and her own liberty by the wrong doing of that man.
After that, Verres comes to Lilybaeum; he takes cognisance of the affair; he disapproves of the act; he compels his quaestor to pay back and restore to its owner all the money which he had confiscated, having been received for the property of Agonis.
He is here, and you may well admire it, no longer Verres, but Quintus Mucius.
For what could he do more delicate to obtain a high character among men? what more just to relieve the distress of the women? what more severe to repress the licentiousness of his quaestor?
All this appears to me most exceedingly praiseworthy.
But at the very next step, in a moment, as if he had drank of some Circaean cup, having been a man, he becomes Verres again; he returns to himself and to his old habits.
For of that money he appropriated a great share to himself, and restored to the woman only as much as he chose.
Here now if you say that you were offended with Verres, I will grant you that and allow it; if you complain that he did you any injury, I will defend him and deny it.
Secondly, I say that of the injury which was done to you no one of us ought to be a more severe avenger than you yourself, to whom it is said to have been done.
If you afterwards became reconciled to him, if you were often at his house, if he after that supped with you, do you prefer to be considered as acting with treachery or by collusion with him?
I see that one of these alternatives is inevitable, but in this matter I will have no contention with you to prevent your adopting which you please.
What shall I say if even the pretext of that injury which was done to you by him no longer remains?
What have you then to say why you should be preferred, I will not say to me, but to any one?
except that which I hear you intend to say, that you were his quaestor: which indeed would be an important allegation if you were contending with me as to which of us ought to be the most friendly to him; but in a contention as to which is to take up a quarrel against him, it is ridiculous to suppose that an intimate connection with him can be a just reason for bringing him into danger.
In truth, if you had received ever so many injuries from your praetor, still you would deserve greater credit by bearing them than by revenging them; but when nothing in his life was ever done more rightly than that which you call an injury, shall these judges determine that this cause, which they would not even tolerate in any one else, shall appear in your case to be a reasonable one to justify the violation of your ancient connection?
When even if you had received the greatest injury from him, still, since you have been his quaestor, you cannot accuse him and remain blameless yourself.
But if no injury has been done you at all, you cannot accuse him without wickedness; and as it is very uncertain whether any injury has been done you, do you think that there is any one of these men who would not prefer that you should depart without incurring blame rather than after having committed wickedness?
And just think how great is the difference between my opinion and yours.
You, though you are in every respect inferior to me, still think that you ought to be preferred to me for this one reason, because you were his quaestor.
I think, that if you were my superior in every other qualification, still that for this one cause alone you ought to be rejected as the prosecutor.
For this is the principle which has been handed down to us from our ancestors, that a praetor ought to be in the place of a parent to his quaestor; that no more reasonable nor more important cause of intimate friendship can be imagined than a connection arising from drawing the same lot, having the same province, and being associated in the discharge of the same public duty and office.
Wherefore, even if you could accuse him without violating strict right, still, as he had been in the place of a parent to you, you could not do so without violating every principle of piety.
But as you have not received any injury, and would yet be creating danger for your praetor, you must admit that you are endeavouring to wage an unjust and impious war against him.
In truth, your quaestorship is an argument of so strong a nature, that you would have to take a great deal of pains to find an excuse for accusing him to whom you had acted as quaestor, and can never be a reason why you should claim on that account to have the office of prosecuting him entrusted to you above all men.
Nor indeed, did any one who had acted as quaestor to another, ever contest the point of being allowed to accuse him without being rejected.
And therefore, neither was permission given to Lucius Philo to bring forward an accusation against Caius Servilius, nor to Marcus Aurelius Scaurus to prosecute Lucius Flaccus, nor to Cnaeus Pompeius to accuse Titus Albucius; not one of whom was refused this, permission because of any personal unworthiness, but in order that the desire to violate such an intimate connection might not be sanctioned by the authority of the judges.
And that great man Cnaeus Pompeius contended about that matter with Caius Julius, just as you are contending with me.
For he had been the quaestor of Albucius, just as you were of Verres: Julius had on his side this reason for conducting the prosecution, that, just as we have now been entreated by the Sicilians, so he had then been entreated by the Sardinians, to espouse their cause.
And this argument has always had the greatest influence; this has always been the most honourable cause for acting as accuser, that by so doing one is bringing enmity on oneself in behalf of allies, for the sake of the safety of a province, for the advantage of foreign nations that one is for their sakes incurring danger, and spending much care and anxiety and labour.
Even if the cause of those men who wish to revenge their own injuries be ever so strong, in which matter they are only obeying their own feelings of indignation, not consulting the advantage of the republic: how much more honourable is that cause, which is not only reasonable, but which ought to be acceptable to all, that a man, without having received any private injury to himself, should be influenced by the sufferings and injuries of the allies and friends of the Roman people!
When lately that most brave and upright man Lucius Piso demanded to be allowed to prefer an accusation against Publius Gabinius, and when Quintus Caecilius claimed the same permission in opposition to Piso, and said that in so doing he was following up an old quarrel which he had long had with Gabinius; it was not only the authority and dignity of Piso which had great weight, but also the superior justice of his cause, because the Achaeans had adopted him as their patron.
In truth, when the very law itself about extortion is the protectress of the allies and friends of the Roman people, it is an iniquitous thing that he should not, above all others, he thought the fittest advocate of the law and conductor of the trial, whom the allies wish, above all men, to be the pleader of their cause, and the defender of their fortunes.
Or ought not that which is the more honourable to mention, to appear also far the most reasonable to approve of?
Which then is the more splendid, which is the more honourable allegation "I have prosecuted this man to whom I had acted as quaestor, with whom the lot cast for the provinces, and the custom of our ancestors, and the judgment of gods and men had connected me," or, "I have prosecuted this man at the request of the allies and friends of the Roman people, I have been selected by the whole province to defend its rights and fortunes?"
Can any one doubt that it is more honourable to act as prosecutor in behalf of those men among whom you have been quaestor, than as prosecutor of him whose quaestor you have been?
The most illustrious men of our state, in the best of times, used to think this most honourable and glorious for them to ward off injuries from their hereditary friends, and from their clients, and from foreign nations which were either friends or subjects of the Roman people, and to defend their fortunes.
We learn from tradition that Marcus Cato, that wise man, that most illustrious and most prudent man, brought upon himself great enmity from many men, on account of the injuries of the Spaniards among whom he had been when consul.
We know that lately Cnaeus Domitius prosecuted Marcus Silanus on account of the injuries of one man, Egritomarus, his father's friend and comrade.
Nor indeed has anything ever had more influence over the minds of guilty men than this principle of our ancestors, now re-adopted and brought back among us after a long interval, namely, that the complaints of the allies should be brought to a man who is not very inactive, and their advocacy undertaken by him who appeared able to defend their fortunes with integrity and diligence.
Men are afraid of this; they endeavour to prevent this; they are disquieted at such a principle having ever been adopted, and after it has been adopted at its now being resuscitated and brought into play again.
They think that, if this custom begins gradually to creep on and advance, the laws will be put in execution, and actions will be conducted by honourable and fearless men, and not by unskillful youths, or informers of this sort.
Of which custom and principle our fathers and ancestors did not repent when Publius Lentulus, he who was chief of the Senate, prosecuted Marcus Aquillius, having Caius Rutilius Rufus backing the accusation; or when Publius Africanus, a man most eminent for valour, for good fortune, for renown, and for exploits, after he had been twice consul and had been censor brought Lucius Cotta to trial
Then the name of the Roman people was rightly held in high honour; rightly was the authority of this empire and the majesty of the state considered illustrious.
Nobody marveled in the case of that great man Africanus, as they now pretend to marvel with respect to me, a man endowed with but moderate influence and moderate talents, just because they are annoyed at me;
"What can he be meaning?
does he want to be considered a prosecutor who hitherto has been accustomed to defend people? and especially now at the age when he is seeking the aedileship?"
But I think it becomes not my age only, but even a much greater age, and I think it an action consistent with the highest dignity to accuse the wicked, and to defend the miserable and distressed.
And in truth, either this is a remedy for a republic diseased and in an almost desperate condition, and for tribunals corrupted and contaminated by the vices and baseness of a few, for men of the greatest possible honour and uprightness and modesty to undertake to uphold the stability of the laws, and the authority of the courts of justice; or else, if this is of no advantage, no medicine whatever will ever be found for such terrible and numerous evils as these.
There is no greater safety for a republic, than for those who accuse another to be no less alarmed for their own credit, and honour, and reputation, than they who are accused are for their lives and fortunes.
And therefore, those men have always conducted prosecutions with the greatest care and with the greatest pains, who have considered that they themselves had their reputations at stake.
You, therefore, O judges ought to come to this decision, that Quintus Caecilius of whom no one has ever had any opinion, and from whom even in this very trial nothing could be expected who takes no trouble either to preserve a reputation previously acquired, or to give grounds for hope of himself in future times will not be likely to conduct this cause with too much severity, with too much accuracy, or with too much diligence.
For he has nothing which he can lose by disappointing public expectation; even if he were to come off ever so shamefully, or ever so infamously, he will lose no credit which he at present enjoys.
From us the Roman people has many hostages which we must labour with all our might and by every possible means to preserve uninjured, to defend, to keep in safety, and to redeem;
it has honour which we are desirous of; it has hope, which we constantly keep before our eyes; it has reputation, acquired with much sweat and labour day and night; so that if we prove our duty and industry in this cause, we may be able to preserve all those things which I have mentioned safe and unimpaired by the favour of the Roman people; but if we trip and stumble ever so little, we may at one moment lose the whole of those things which have been collected one by one and by slow degrees.
On which account it is your business, O judges, to select him who you think can most easily sustain this great cause and trial with integrity, with diligence, with wisdom, and with authority.
If you prefer Quintus Caecilius to me, I shall not think that I am surpassed in dignity; but take you care that the Roman people do not think that a prosecution as honest, as severe, as diligent as this would have been in my hands, was neither pleasing to yourselves nor to your body.
Although I am afraid, O judges, that it is a base thing for one who is beginning to speak for a very brave man to be alarmed, and though it is far from becoming, when Titus Annius Milo himself is more disturbed for the safety of the republic than for his own, that I should not be able to bring to the cause a similar greatness of mind, yet this novel appearance of a new manner of trial alarms my eyes, which, wherever they fall, seek for the former customs of the forum and the ancient practice in trials.
For your assembly is not surrounded by a circle of bystanders as usual; we are not attended by our usual company.
For those guards which you behold in front of all the temples, although they are placed there as a protection against violence, yet they bring no aid to the orator, so that even in the forum and in the court of justice itself, although we are protected with all military and necessary defences, yet we cannot be entirely without fear.
But if I thought this adverse to Milo, I should yield to the times, O judges, and among such a crowd of armed men, I should think there was no room for an orator.
But the wisdom of Cnaeus Pompeius, a most wise and just man, strengthens and encourages me, who would certainly neither think it suitable to his justice to deliver that man up to the weapons of the soldiery whom he had given over as an accused person to the decision of the judges, nor suitable to his wisdom to arm the rashness of an excited multitude with public authority.
So that those arms, those centurions, those cohorts, do not announce danger to us, but protection; nor do they expect us only to be calm, but even to be courageous, nor do they promise only assistance to my defence but also silence.
And the rest of the multitude which consists of citizens is wholly ours; nor is there any one individual among those whom you see from this place gazing upon us from all sides from which any part of the forum can be seen and watching the result of this trial who, while he favours the virtue of Milo, does not think that this day in reality his own interests, those of his children, his country, and his fortunes, are at stake.
There is one class adverse and hostile to us, those whom the madness of Publius Clodius has fed on rapine, on conflagration, and on every sort of public disaster; and who were, even in the assembly held yesterday, exhorted to teach you, by their clamour, what you were to decide.
But such shouts, if any reached you, should rather warn you to retain him as a citizen who has always slighted that class of men, and their greatest clamour, in comparison with your safety.
Wherefore, be of good courage, O judges, and lay aside your alarm, if indeed you feel any;
for if ever you had to decide about good and brave men, and about citizens who had deserved well of their country, if ever an opportunity was given to chosen men of the most honourable ranks to show by their deeds and resolutions that disposition towards brave and good citizens which they had often declared by their looks and by their words, all that power you now have, when you are to determine whether we who have always been wholly devoted to your authority are to be miserable, and to mourn for ever, or whether, having been long harassed by the most abandoned citizens, we shall at length he reprieved and set up again by you, your loyalty, your virtue, and your wisdom.
For what, O judges, is more full of labour than we both are, what can be either expressed or imagined more full of anxiety and uneasiness than we are, who being induced to devote ourselves to the republic by the hope of the most honourable rewards, yet cannot be free from the fear of the most cruel punishments?
I have always thought indeed that Milo had to encounter the other storms and tempests in these billows of the assemblies because he always espoused the cause of the good against the bad; but in a court of justice, and in that council in which the most honourable men of all ranks are sitting as judges, I never imagined that Milo's enemies could have any hope of diminishing his glory by the aid of such men, much less of at all injuring his safety.
Although in this cause, O judges, we shall not employ the tribuneship of Titus Annius, and all the exploits which he has performed for the safety of the republic, as topics for our defence against this accusation,
unless you see with your own eyes that a plot was laid against Milo by Clodius; and we shall not entreat you to pardon us this one offence in consideration of our many eminent services to the republic,
nor shall we demand, if the death of Publius Clodius was your safety, that on that account you should attribute it rather to the virtue of Milo, than to the good fortune of the Roman people; but if his plots are made clearer than the day, then indeed I shall entreat, and shall demand of you, O judges, that, if we have lost everything else, this at least may be left us, namely, the privilege of defending our lives from the audacity and weapons of our enemies with impunity.
But before I come to that part of my speech which especially belongs to this trial, it seems necessary to refute those things which have been often said, both in the senate by our enemies, and in the assembly of the people by wicked men, and lately, too, by our prosecutors; so that when every cause of alarm is removed, you may be able distinctly to see the matter which is the subject of this trial.
They say that that man ought no longer to see the light who confesses that another man has been slain by him.
In what city, then, are these most foolish men using this argument?
In this one, forsooth, where the first trial for a man's life that took place at all was that of Marcus Horatius, a most brave man, who even before the city was free was yet acquitted by the assembly of the Roman people, though he avowed that his sister had been slain by his hand.
Is there any one who does not know, that when inquiry is made into the slaying of a man, it is usual either altogether to deny that the deed has been done, or else to defend it on the ground that it was rightly and lawfully done?
unless, indeed, you think that Publius Africanus was out of his mind, who, when he was asked in a seditious spirit by Caius Carbo, a tribune of the people, what was his opinion of the death of Tiberius Gracchus, answered that he seemed to have been rightly slain.
For neither could Servilius Ahala, that eminent man, nor Publius Nasica, nor Lucius Opimius, nor Caius Marius, nor indeed the senate itself during my consulship, have been accounted anything but wicked, if it was unlawful for wicked citizens to be put to death.
And therefore, O judges, it was not without good reason, that even in legendary fables learned men have handed down the story, that he, who for the sake of avenging his father had killed his mother, when the opinions of men varied, was acquitted not only by the voices of the gods, but even by the very wisest goddess.
And if the Twelve Tables have permitted that a nightly robber may be slain any way, but a robber by day if he defends himself, with a weapon, who is there who can think a man to be punished for slaying another, in whatever way he is slain, when he sees that sometimes a sword to kill a man with is put into our bands by the very laws themselves?
But if there be any occasion on which it is proper to slay a man, and there are many such, surely that occasion is not only a just one, but even a necessary one, when violence is offered, and can only be repelled by violence.
When a military tribune offered violence to a soldier in the army of Caius Marius, the kinsman of that commander was slain by the man whom he was insulting; for the virtuous youth chose to act though with danger, rather than to suffer infamously; and his illustrious commander acquitted him of all guilt, and treated him well.
But what death can be unjust when inflicted on a secret plotter and robber?
What is the meaning of our retinues, what of our swords
Surely it would never be permitted to us to have them if we might never use them.
This, therefore, is a law, O judges, not written, but born with us, which we have not learnt or received by tradition, or read, but which we have taken and sucked in and imbibed from nature herself; a law which we were not taught but to which we were made, which we were not trained in, but which is ingrained in us, namely, that if our life be in danger from plots, or from open violence, or from the weapons of robbers or enemies, every means of securing our safety is honourable.
For laws are silent when arms are raised, and do not expect themselves to be waited for, when he who waits will have to suffer an undeserved penalty before he can exact a merited punishment.
The law very wisely, and in a manner silently, gives a man a right to defend himself, and does not merely forbid a man to be slain, but forbids any one to leave a weapon about him with the object of slaying a man; so that as the object and not the weapon itself, is made the subject of the inquiry, the man who had used a weapon with the object of defending himself would be decided not to have had his weapon about him with the object of killing a man.
Let, then, this principle remembered by you in this trial, O judges; for I do not doubt that I shall make good my defence before you, if you only remember what you cannot forget that a plotter against one may be lawfully slain.
The next point is one which is often asserted by the enemies of Milo, who say that the senate has decided that the slaughter by which Publius Clodius fell was contrary to the interests of the republic.
But, in fact, the senate has approved, not merely by their votes, but even zealously.
For how often has that cause been pleaded by us in the senate? with what great assent of the whole body?
and that no silent nor concealed assent; for when in a very full senate were there ever four or five men found who did not espouse Milo's cause?
Those lifeless assemblies of this nearly burnt tribune of the people show the fact; assemblies in which he daily used to try and bring my power into unpopularity, by saying that the senate did not pass its decrees according to what it thought itself, but as I chose.
And if, indeed, that ought to be called power, rather than a moderate influence in a righteous cause on account of great services done to the republic, or some popularity among the good on account of dutiful labours for its sake, let it be called so, as long as we employ it for the safety of the good in opposition to the madness of the wicked.
But this investigation though it is not an unjust one, yet is not one which the senate thought ought to be ordered, for there were regular laws and forms of trial for murder or for assault; nor did the death of Publius Clodius cause the senate such concern and sorrow that any new process of investigation need have been appointed for when the senate had had the power of decreeing a trial in the matter of that impious pollution of which he was guilty taken from it, who can believe it thought it necessary to appoint a new form of trial about his death?
Why then did the senate decide that this burning of the senate house, this siege laid to the house of Marcus Lepidus, and this very homicide had taken place contrary to the interest of the republic?
Why, because no violence from one citizen to another can ever take place in a free state which is not contrary to the interests of the republic.
For the defending of oneself against violence is never a thing to be wished for; but it is sometimes necessary, unless, indeed, one could say that that day on which Tiberius Gracchus was slain, or that day when Caius was, or the day when the arms of Saturninus were put down, even if they ended as the welfare of the republic demanded, were yet no wound and injury to the republic.
Therefore I myself voted, when it was notorious that a homicide had taken place on the Appian road, not that he who had defended himself had acted in a manner contrary to the interests of the republic; but as there was violence and treachery in the business, I reserved the charge for trial, I expressed my disapprobation of the business.
And if the senate had not been hindered by that frantic tribune from executing its wishes, we should not now have this novel trial.
For the senate voted that an extraordinary investigation should take place according to the ancient laws.
A division took place, it does not signify on whose motion, for it is not necessary to mention the worthlessness of every one, and so the rest of the authority of the senate was destroyed by this corrupt intercession.
"Oh, but Cnaeus Pompeius, by his bill, gave his decision both about the fact and about the cause.
For he brought in a bill about the homicide which had taken place on the Appian road, in which Publius Clodius was slain."
What then did he propose?
That an inquiry should be made.
What is to be inquired about?
Whether it was committed?
That is clear.
By whom?
He saw that a defence as to the law and right could be undertaken, even at the very moment of the confession of the act.
But if he had not seen that he who confessed might yet be acquitted, when he saw that we did not confess the fact he would never have ordered an investigation to take place, nor would he have given you at this trial the power of acquitting as well as that of condemning.
But it seems to me that Cnaeus Pompeius not only delivered no decision at all unfavourable to Milo, but that he also pointed out what you ought to turn your attention to in deciding.
For he who did not assign a punishment to the confession, but required a defence of it, he clearly thought that what was inquired into was the cause of the death and not the mere fact of the death
Now he himself shall tell us whether what he did of his own accord was done out of regard for Publius Clodius, or from a compliance with the times.
A most noble man, a bulwark, and in those times, indeed, almost a protector of the senate, the uncle of this our judge, of that most fearless man Marcus Cato, Marcus Drusus, a tribune of the people, was slain in his own house.
The people had never any reference made to them in the matter of his death, no investigation was voted by the senate.
What great grief was there, as we have heard from our forefathers in this city, when that attack was made by night on Publius Africanus, while sleeping in his own house!
Who was there then who did not groan, who did not burn with indignation, that men should not have waited even for the natural and inevitable death of that man whom, if possible, all would have wished to be immortal?
Was there then any extraordinary investigation into the death of Africanus voted? Certainly none.
Why so?
Because the crime of murder is not different when eminent men, or when obscure ones are slain.
Let there be a difference between the dignity of the lives of the highest and lowest citizens.
If their death be wrought by wickedness, that must be avenged by the same laws and punishments in either case;
unless, indeed, he is more a parricide who murders a father of consular rank than he who murders one of low degree; or, as if the death of Publius Clodius is to be more criminal because he was slain among the monuments of his ancestors, for this is constantly said by that party; as if, I suppose, that illustrious Appius Caecus made that road, not that the nation might have a road to use, but that his own posterity might have a place in which to rob with impunity.
Therefore in that same Appian road, when Publius Clodius had slain a most accomplished Roman knight, Marcus Papirius, that crime was not to be punished; for a nobleman among his own family monuments had slain a Roman knight.
Now what tragedies does the name of that same Appian road awaken?
which, though nothing was said about it formerly, when stained with the murder of an honourable and innocent man, is now incessantly mentioned ever since it has been dyed with the blood of a robber and a parricide.
But why do I speak of these things?
A slave of Publius Clodius was arrested in the temple of Castor;
whom he had placed there to murder Cnaeus Pompeius;
the dagger was wrested from his hands and he confessed his design;
after that Pompeius absented himself from the forum, absented himself from the senate, and from all public places; he defended himself within his own doors and walls, not by the power of the laws and tribunals.
Was any motion made?
was any extraordinary investigation voted?
But if any circumstance, if any man, if any occasion was ever important enough for such a step, certainly all these things were so in the greatest degree in that cause.
The assassin had been stationed in the forum, and in the very vestibule of the senate.
Death was being prepared for that man on whose life the safety of the senate depended.
Moreover, at that crisis of the republic, when, if he alone had died, not only this state, but all the nations in the world would have been ruined, unless, indeed, the crime was not to be punished because it was not accomplished, just as if the execution of crimes was chastised by the laws, and not the intentions of men, certainly there was less cause to grieve, as the deed was not accomplished, but certainly not a whit the less cause to punish.
How often, O judges, have I myself escaped from the weapons and from the bloody hands of Publius Clodius!
But if my good fortune, or that of the republic, had not preserved me from them, who would have proposed any investigation into my death .
But it is foolish of us to dare to compare Drusus, Africanus, Pompeius or ourselves with Publius Clodius.
All these things were endurable.
The death of Publius Clodius no one can bear with equanimity.
The senate is in mourning; the knights grieve, the whole state is broken down as if with age; the municipalities are in mourning, the colonies are bowed down; the very fields even regret so beneficent, so useful, so kind hearted a citizen!
did you not also at Agrigentum take away a monument of the same Publius Scipio, a most beautiful statue of Apollo, on whose thigh there was the name of Myron, inscribed in diminutive silver letters, out of that most holy temple of Aesculapius?
And when, O judges, he had privately committed that atrocity, and when in that most nefarious crime and robbery he had employed some of the most worthless men of the city as his guides and assistants, the whole city was greatly excited.
For the Agrigentines were regretting at the same time the kindness of Africanus, and a national object of their worship, and an ornament of their city, and a record of their victory, and an evidence of their alliance with us.
And therefore a command is imposed on those men who were the chief men of the city, and a charge is given to the quaestors and aediles to keep watch by night over the sacred edifices.
And, indeed, at Agrigentum, (I imagine, on account of the great number and virtue of these men, and because great numbers of Roman citizens, gallant and intrepid and honourable men, live and trade in that town among the Agrigentines in the greatest harmony,) he did not dare openly to carry off, or even to beg for the things that took his fancy.
There is a temple of Hercules at Agrigentum, not far from the forum, considered very holy and greatly reverenced among the citizens.
In it there is a brazen image of Hercules himself, than which I cannot easily tell where I have seen anything finer; (although I am not very much of a judge of those matters, though I have seen plenty of specimens;) so greatly venerated among them, O judges, that his mouth and his chin are a little worn away, because men in addressing their prayers and congratulations to him, are accustomed not only to worship the statue, but even to kiss it.
While that man was at Agrigentum, on a sudden, one stormy night, a great assemblage of armed slaves, and a great attack on this temple by them, takes place, under the leading of Timarchides.
A cry is raised by the watchmen and guardians of the temple.
And, at first, when they attempted to resist them and to defend the temple, they are driven back much injured with sticks and bludgeons.
Afterwards, when the bolts were forced open, and the doors dashed in, they endeavour to pull down the statue and to overthrow it with levers;
meantime, from the outcries of the keepers, a report got abroad over the whole city, that the national gods were being stormed, not by the unexpected invasion of enemies, or by the sudden irruption of pirates, but that a well armed and fully equipped band of fugitive slaves from the house and retinue of the praetor had attacked them.
No one in Agrigentum was either so advanced in age, or so infirm in strength, as not to rise up on that night, awakened by that news, and to seize whatever weapon chance put into his hands.
So in a very short time men are assembled at the temple from every part of the city.
Already, for more than an hour, numbers of men had been labouring at pulling down that statue;
and all that time it gave no sign of being shaken in any part;
while some, putting levers under it, were endeavouring to throw it down, and others, having bound cords to all its limbs, were trying to pull it towards them.
On a sudden all the Agrigentines collect together at the place;
stones are thrown in numbers;
the nocturnal soldiers of that illustrious commander run away
but they take with them two very small statues, in order not to return to that robber of all holy things entirely empty-handed.
The Sicilians are never in such distress as not to be able to say something facetious and neat; as they did on this occasion.
And so they said that this enormous boar had a right to be accounted one of the labours of Hercules, no less than the other boar of Erymanthus.
The people of Assorum, gallant and loyal men, afterwards imitated this brave conduct of the Agrigentines, though they did not come of so powerful or so distinguished a city.
There is a river called Chrysas, which flows through the territories of Assorum.
Among that people, he is considered a god, and is worshipped with the greatest reverence.
His temple is in the fields, near the road which goes from Assorum to Enna.
In it there is an image of Chrysas, exquisitely made of marble.
He did not dare to beg that of the Assorians on account of the extraordinary sanctity of that temple;
so he entrusts the business to Tlepolemus and Hiero.
They, having prepared and armed a body of men, come by night;
they break in the doors of the temple;
the keepers of the temple and the guardians hear them in time.
A trumpet the signal of alarm well known to all the neighbourhood, is sounded;
men come in from the country,
Tlepolemus is turned out and put to fight;
nor was anything missed out of the temple of Chrysas except one very diminutive image of brass.
There is a temple of the mighty mother at Enguinum, for I must new not only mention each instance with the greatest brevity,
but I must even pass over a great many, in order to come to the greater and more remarkable thefts and atrocities of this sort which this man has committed.
In this temple that same Publius Scipio, a man excelling in every possible good quality, had placed breastplates and helmets of brass of Corinthian workmanship, and some huge ewers of a similar description, and wrought with the same exquisite skill, and had inscribed his own name upon them.
Why should I make any more statements or utter any further complaints about that man's conduct?
He took away, O judges, every one of those things.
He left nothing in that most holy temple except the traces of the religion he had trampled on, and the name of Publius Scipio.
The spoils won from the enemy, the memorials of our commanders, the ornaments and decorations of our temples, will hereafter, when these illustrious names are lost, be reckoned in the furniture and appointments of Verres.
Are you, forsooth, the only man who delights in Corinthian vases?
Are you the best judge in the world of the mixture of that celebrated bronze, and of the delicate tracery of that work?
Did not the great Scipio, that most learned and accomplished mall, under stand it too?
But do you, a man without one single virtue, without education, without natural ability, and without any information, understand them and value them?
Beware lest he be seen to have surpassed you and those other men who wished to be thought so elegant, not only in temperance, but in judgment and taste;
for it was because he thoroughly understood how beautiful they were, that he thought that they were made, not for the luxury of men, but for the ornamenting of temples and cities, in order that they might appear to our posterity to be holy and sacred monuments.
Listen also, O judges, to the man's singular covetousness, audacity and madness, especially in polluting those sacred things, which not only may not be touched with the hands, but which may not be violated even in thought.
There is a shrine of Ceres among the Catenans of the same holy nature as the one at home, and worshipped as the goddess is worshipped among foreign nations, and in almost every country in the world.
In the inmost part of that shrine there was an extremely ancient statue of Ceres, as to which men were not only ignorant of what sort it was, but even of its existence. For the entrance into that shrine does not belong to men, the sacred ceremonies are accustomed to be performed by women and virgins.
The slaves of that man stole this statue by night out of that most holy and most ancient temple.
The next day the priestesses of Ceres, and the female attendants of that temple, women of great age, noble and of proved virtue, report the affair to their magistrates.
It appeared to all a most bitter, and scandalous, and miserable business.
Then that man, influenced by the atrocity of the action, in order that all suspicion of that crime might be removed from himself, employs some one connected with him by ties of hospitality to find a man whom he might accuse of having done it, and bids him take care that he be convicted of the accusation, so that he himself might not be subject to the charge.
The matter is not delayed.
For when he had departed from Catina, an information is laid against a certain slave.
He is accused;
false witnesses are suborned against him;
the whole senate sits in judgment on the affair, according to the laws of the Catenans.
The priestesses are summoned;
they are examined secretly in the senate-house, and asked what had been done, and how they thought that the statue had been carried off.
They answer that the servants of the praetor had been seen in the temple.
The matter, which previously had not been very obscure, began to be clear enough by the evidence of the priestesses.
The judges deliberate;
the innocent slave is acquitted by every vote, in order that you may the more easily be able to condemn this man by all your votes.
For what is it that you ask, O Verres?
What do you hope for?
What do you expect?
What god or man do you think will come to your assistance?
Did you send slaves to that place to plunder a temple, where it was not lawful for free citizens to go, not even for the purpose of praying?
Did you not hesitate to lay violent hands on those things from which the laws of religion enjoined you to keep even your eyes?
Although it was not even because you were charmed by the eye that you were led into this wicked and nefarious conduct;
for you coveted what you had never seen.
You took a violent fancy, I say, to that which you had not previously beheld.
From your ears did you conceive this covetousness, so violent that no fear, no religious scruple, no power of the gods, no regard for the opinion of men could restrain it.
Oh! but you had heard of it, I suppose, from some good man, from some good authority.
How could you have done that, when you could never have heard of it from any man at all?
You heard of it, therefore, from a woman; since men could not have seen it nor known of it.
What sort of woman do you think that she must have been, O judges?
What a modest woman must she have been to converse with Verres!
What a pious woman, to show him a plan for robbing a temple!
But it is no great wonder if those sacred ceremonies which are performed by the most extreme chastity of virgins and matrons were violated by his adultery and profligacy.
What, then, are we to think?
Is this the only thing that he began to desire from mere hearing, when he had never seen it himself?
No, there were many other things besides;
of which I will select the plundering of that most noble and ancient temple, concerning which you heard witnesses give their evidence at the former pleading.
Now, I beseech you, listen to the same story once more, and attend carefully as you hitherto have done.
There is an island called Melita, O judges, separated from Sicily by a sufficiently wide and perilous navigation,
in which there is a town of the same name, to which Verres never went, though it was for three years a manufactory to him for weaving women's garments.
Not far from that town, on a promontory, is an ancient temple of Juno, which was always considered so holy, that it was not only always kept inviolate and sacred in those Punic wars, which in those regions were carried on almost wholly by the naval forces, but even by the bands of pirates which ravage those seas.
Moreover, it has been handed down to us by tradition, that once, when the fleet of King Masinissa was forced to put into these ports, the king's lieutenant took away some ivory teeth of an incredible size out of the temple, and carried them into Africa, and gave them to Masinissa;
that at first the king was delighted with the present, but afterwards, when he heard where they had come from, he immediately sent trustworthy men in a quinquereme to take those teeth back;
and that there was engraved on them in Punic characters, that Masinissa the king had accepted them ignorantly; but that, when he knew the truth, he had taken care that they should be replaced and restored.
There was besides an immense quantity of ivory, and many ornaments, among which were some ivory victories of ancient workmanship, and wrought with exquisite skill.
Not to dwell too long on this, he took care to have all these things taken down and carried off at one swoop by means of the slaves of the Venus whom he had sent thither for that purpose.
O ye immortal gods!
what sort of man is it that I am accusing?
Who is it that I am prosecuting according to our laws, and by this regular process?
Concerning whom is it that you are going to give your judicial decision?
The deputies from Melita sent by the public authority of their state, say that the shrine of Juno was plundered;
that that man left nothing in that most holy temple;
that that place, to which the fleets of enemies often came,
where pirates are accustomed to winter almost every year, and which no pirate ever violated, no enemy ever attacked before, was so plundered by that single man, that nothing whatever was left in it.
What, then, now are we to say of him as a defendant, of me as an accuser, of this tribunal?
Is he proved guilty of grave crimes, or is he brought into this court on mere suspicion?
Gods are proved to have been carried off, temples to have been plundered, cities to have been stripped of everything.
And of those actions he has left himself no power of denying one, no plea for defending one.
In every particular he is convicted by me;
he is detected by the witnesses;
he is overwhelmed by his own admissions;
he is caught in the evident commission of guilt;
and even now he remains here, and in silence recognizes his own crimes as I enumerate them.
I seem to myself to have been too long occupied with one class of crime.
I am aware, O judges, that I have to encounter the weariness of your ears and eyes at such a repetition of similar cases;
I will, therefore, pass over many instances.
But I entreat you, O judges, in the name of the immortal gods, in the name of these very gods of whose honour and worship we have been so long speaking, refresh your minds so as to attend to what I am about to mention,
while I bring forward and detail to you that crime of his by which the whole province was roused,
and in speaking of which you will pardon me if I appear to go back rather far, and trace the earliest recollections of the religious observances in question.
The importance of the affair will not allow me to pass over the atrocity of his guilt with brevity.
It is an old opinion, O judges, which can be proved from the most ancient records and monuments of the Greeks, that the whole island of Sicily was consecrated to Ceres and Libera.
Not only did all other nations think so but the Sicilians themselves were so convinced of it, that it appeared a deeply rooted and innate belief in their minds.
For they believe that these goddesses were born in these districts, and that grain was first discovered in this land, and that Libera was carried off, the same goddess whom they call Proserpina, from a grove in the territory of Enna, a place which, because it is situated in the centre of the island, is called the navel of Sicily.
And when Ceres wished to seek her and trace her out, she is said to have lit her torches at those flames which burst out at the summit of Aetna, and carrying these torches before her, to have wandered over the whole earth.
But Enna, where those things which I am speaking of are said to have been done, is in a high and lofty situation, on the top of which is a large level plain, and springs of water which are never dry.
And the whole of the plain is cut off and separated, so as to be difficult of approach.
Around it are many lakes and groves, and beautiful flowers at every season of the year;
so that the place itself appears to testify to that abduction of the virgin which we have heard of from our boyhood.
Near it is a cave turned towards the north, of unfathomable depth, where they say that Father Pluto suddenly rose out of the earth in his chariot, and carried the virgin off from that spot, and that on a sudden, at no great distance from Syracuse, he went down beneath the earth, and that immediately a lake sprang up in that place;
and there to this day the Syracusans celebrate anniversary festivals with a most numerous assemblage of both sexes.
On account of the antiquity of this belief, because in those places the traces and almost the cradles of those gods are found, the worship of Ceres of Enna prevails to a wonderful extent, both in private and in public over all Sicily.
In truth, many prodigies often attest her influence and divine powers.
Her present help is often brought to many in critical circumstances, so that this island appears not only to be loved, but also to be watched over and protected by her.
Nor is it the Sicilians only, but even all other tribes and nations greatly worship Ceres of Enna.
In truth, if initiation into those sacred mysteries of the Athenians sought for with the greatest avidity, to which people Ceres is said to have come in that long wandering of hers, and then she brought them grain.
How much greater reverence ought to be paid to her by those people among whom it is certain that she was born, and first discovered grain.
And, therefore, in the time of our fathers, at a most disastrous and critical time to the republic,
when, after the death of Tiberius Gracchus, there was a fear that great dangers were portended to the state by various prodigies,
in the consulship of Publius Mucius and Lucius Calpurnius, recourse was had to the Sibylline books,
in which it was found set down, "that the most ancient Ceres ought to be appeased."
Then, priests of the Roman people, selected from the most honourable college of decemvirs, although there was in our own city a most beautiful and magnificent temple of Ceres, nevertheless went as far as Enna.
For such was the authority and antiquity of the reputation for holiness of that place, that when they went thither, they seemed to be going not to a temple of Ceres, but to Ceres herself.
I will not din this into your ears any longer.
I have been some time afraid that my speech may appear unlike the usual fashion of speeches at trials unlike the daily method of speaking.
This I say, that this very Ceres, the most ancient, the most holy, the very chief of all sacred things which are honoured by every people, and in every nation, was carried off by Caius Verres from her temple and her home.
You who have been to Enna, have seen a statue of Ceres made of marble, and in the other temple a statue of Libera.
They are very colossal and very beautiful, but not exceedingly ancient.
There was one of brass, of moderate size, but extraordinary workmanship, with the torches in its hands, very ancient, by far the most ancient of all those statues which are in that temple; that he carried off, and yet he was not content with that.
Before the temple of Ceres, in an open and an uncovered place, there are two statues, one of Ceres, the other of Triptolemus, very beautiful, and of colossal size.
Their beauty was their danger, but their size their safety, because the taking of them down and carrying them off appeared very difficult.
But in the right hand of Ceres there stood a beautifully wrought image of Victory, and this he had wrenched out of the hand of Ceres and carried off.
What now must be his feelings at the recollection of his crimes, when I, at the mere enumeration of them, am not only roused to indignation in my mind, but even shudder over my whole body?
For thoughts of that temple, of that place, of that holy religion come into my mind.
Everything seems present before my eyes, the day on which, when I had arrived at Enna, the priests of Ceres came to meet me with garlands of vervain, and with fillets;
the concourse of citizens, among whom, while I was addressing them, there was such weeping and groaning that the most bitter grief seemed to have taken possession of the whole.
They did not complain of the absolute way in which the tenths were levied, nor of the plunder of property, nor of the iniquity of tribunals, nor of that man's unhallowed lusts, nor of his violence, nor of the insults by which they had been oppressed and overwhelmed.
It was the divinity of Ceres, the antiquity of their sacred observances, the holy veneration due to their temple, which they wished should have atonement made to them by the punishment of that most atrocious and audacious man.
They said that they could endure everything else, that to everything else they were indifferent.
This indignation of theirs was so great, that you might suppose that Verres, like another king of hell, had come to Enna and had carried off, not Proserpina, but Ceres herself.
And, in truth, that city does not appear to be a city, but a shrine of Ceres. The people of Enna think that Ceres dwells among them; so that they appear to me not to be citizens of that city, but to be all priests, to be all ministers and officers of Ceres.
Did you dare to take away out of Enna the statue of Ceres? Did you attempt at Enna to wrench Victory out of the hand of Ceres? to tear one goddess from the other?
nothing of which those men dared to violate, or even to touch, whose qualities were all more akin to wickedness than to religion.
For while Publius Popillius and Publius Rupilius were consuls, slaves, runaway slaves, and barbarians, and enemies, were in possession of that place;
but yet the slaves ware not so much slaves to their own masters, as you are to your passions;
nor did the runaways flee from their masters as far as you flee from all laws and from all right;
nor were the barbarians as barbarous in language and in race as you were in your nature and your habits;
nor were the enemies as much enemies to men as you are to the immortal gods.
How, then, can a man beg for any mercy who has surpassed slaves in baseness, runaway slaves in rashness, barbarians in wickedness, and enemies in inhumanity?
You heard Theodorus and Numinius and Nicasio, deputies from Enna, say, in the name of their state, that they had this commission from their fellow-citizens, to go to Verres, and to demand from him the restoration of the statues of Ceres and of Victory.
And if they obtained it then they were to adhere to the ancient customs of the state of Enna, not to give any public testimony against him although he had oppressed Sicily, since these were the principles which they had received from their ancestors.
But if he did not restore them, then they were to go before the tribunal, to inform the judges of the injuries they had received, but, far above all things, to complain of the insults to their religion.
And, in the name of the immortal gods I entreat you, O judges, do not you despise, do not you scorn or think lightly of their complaints.
The injuries done to our allies are the present question;
the authority of the laws is at stake;
the reputation and the honesty of our courts of justice is at stake.
And though all these are great considerations, yet this is the greatest of all, the whole province is so imbued with religious feeling, such a superstitious dread arising out of that man's conduct has seized upon the minds of all the Sicilians, that whatever public or private misfortunes happen, appear to befall them because of that man's wickedness.
You have heard the Centuripans, the Agyrians, the Catenans, the Herbitans, the Ennans, and many other deputies say, in the name of their states, how great was the solitude in their districts, how great the devastation, how universal the flight of the cultivators of the soil how deserted, how uncultivated, how desolate every place was.
And although there are many and various injuries done by that man to which these things are owing, still this one cause, in the opinion of the Sicilians, is the most weighty of all; for, because of the insults offered to Ceres, they believe that all the crops and gifts of Ceres have perished in these districts.
Bring remedies, O judges, to the insulted religion of the allies; preserve your own,
for this is not a foreign religion, nor one with which you have no concern.
But even if it were, if you were unwilling to adopt it yourselves, still you ought to be willing to inflict heavy punishment on the man who had violated it.
But now that the common religion of all nations is attacked in this way, now that these sacred observances are violated which our ancestors adopted and imported from foreign countries, and have honoured ever since, sacred observances, which they called Greek observances, as in truth they were, even if we were to wish to be indifferent and cold about these matters, how could we be so?
I will mention the sacking of one city, also, and that the most beautiful and highly decorated of all, the city of Syracuse.
And I will produce my proofs of that, O judges, in order at length to conclude and bring to an end the whole history of offences of this sort.
There is scarcely any one of you who has not often heard how Syracuse was taken by Marcus Marcellus, and who has not sometimes also read the account in our annals.
Compare this peace with that war; the visit of this praetor with the victory of that general; the debauched retinue of the one with the invincible army of the other; the lust of Verres with the continence of Marcellus;
and you will say that Syracuse was built by the man who took it; was taken by the man who received it well established and flourishing.
And for the present I omit those things which will be mentioned, and have been already mentioned by me in an irregular manner in different parts of my speech
what the market-place of the Syracusans, which at the entrance of Marcellus was preserved unpolluted by slaughter, on the arrival of Verres overflowed with the blood of innocent Sicilians;
that the harbour of the Syracusans, which at that time was shut against both our fleets and those of the Carthaginians, was, while Verres was praetor, open to Cilician pirates, or even to a single piratical galley.
I say nothing of the violence offered to people of noble birth, of the ravishment of matrons, atrocities which then, when the city was taken, were not committed, neither through the hatred of enemies, nor through military licence, nor through the customs of war or the rights of victory.
I pass over, I say, all these things which were done by that man for three whole years.
Listen rather to acts which are connected with those matters of which I have hitherto been speaking.
You have often heard that the city of Syracuse is the greatest of the Greek cities, and the most beautiful of all.
It is so, O judges, as it is said to be;
for it is so by its situation, which is strongly fortified, and which is on every side by which you can approach it, whether by sea or land, very beautiful to behold.
And it has harbours almost enclosed within the walls, and in the sight of the whole city, harbours which have different entrances, but which meet together, and are connected at the other end.
By their union a part of the town, which is called the island, being separated from the rest by a narrow arm of the sea, is again joined to and connected with the other by a bridge.
That city is so great that it may be said to consist of four cities of the largest size;
one of which, as I have said, is that "Island," which, surrounded by two harbours, projects out towards the mouth and entrance of each.
In it there is a palace which did belong to king Hiero, which our praetors are in the habit of using;
in it are many sacred buildings, but two, which have a great pre-eminence over all the others, one a temple of Diana, and the other one, which before the arrival of that man was the most ornamented of all, sacred to Minerva.
At the end of this island is a fountain of sweet water, the name of which is Arethusa, of incredible size, very full of fish, which would be entirely overwhelmed by the waves of the sea, if it were not protected from the sea by a rampart and dam of stone.
There is also another city at Syracuse, the name of which is Achradina,
in which there is a very large forum, most beautiful porticoes, a highly decorated town-hall, a most spacious senate-house, and a superb temple of Jupiter Olympius;
and the other districts of the city are joined together by one broad unbroken street, and divided by many cross streets, and by private houses.
There is a third city, which because in that district there is an ancient temple of Fortune, is called Tyche,
in which there is a spacious gymnasium, and many sacred buildings, and that district is the most frequented and the most populous.
There is also a fourth city, which, because it is the last built, is called Neapolis, in the highest part of which there is a very large theatre, and, besides that there are two temples of great beauty, one of Ceres, the other of Libera, and a statue of Apollo, which is called Temenites, very beautiful and of colossal size;
which, if he could have moved them, he would not have hesitated to carry off.
Now I will return to Marcellus, that I may not appear to have entered into this statement without any reason.
He, when with his powerful army he had taken this splendid city, did not think it for the credit of the Roman people to destroy and extinguish this splendour, especially as no danger could possibly arise from it,
and therefore he spared all the buildings, public as well as private, sacred as well as ordinary, as if he had come with his army for the purpose of defending them, not of taking them by storm.
With respect to the decorations of the city, he had a regard to his own victory, and a regard to humanity, he thought it was due to his victory to transport man, things to Rome which might be an ornament to this city, and due to humanity not utterly to strip the city, especially as it was one which he was anxious to preserve.
In this division of the ornaments, the victory of Marcellus did not covet more for the Roman people than his humanity reserved to the Syracusans.
The things which were transported to Rome we see before the temples of Honour and of Virtue, and also in other places.
He put nothing in his own house, nothing in his gardens, nothing in his suburban villa;
he thought that his house could only be an ornament to the city if he abstained from carrying the ornaments which belonged to the city to his own house.
But he left many things of extraordinary beauty at Syracuse;
he violated not the respect due to any god; he laid hands on none.
Compare Verres with him; not to compare the man with the man, no such injury must be done to such a man as that, dead though he be; but to compare a state of peace with one of war, a state of law and order, and regular jurisdiction, with one of violence and martial law, and the supremacy of arms; to compare the arrival and retinue of the one with the victory and army of the other.
There is a temple of Minerva in the island, of which I have already spoken, which Marcellus did not touch, which he left full of its treasures and ornaments, but which was so stripped and plundered by Verres, that it seems to have been in the hands, not of any enemy, for enemies, even in war, respect the rites of religion, and the customs of the country, but of some barbarian pirates.
There was a cavalry battle of their king Agathocles, exquisitely painted in a series of pictures, and with these pictures the inside walls of the temple were covered.
Nothing could be more noble than those paintings; there was nothing at Syracuse that was thought more worthy going to see.
These pictures, Marcus Marcellus, though by that victory of his he had divested everything of its sacred inviolability of character, still, out of respect for religion, never touched;
That man, though, in consequence of the long peace, and the loyalty of the Syracusan people, he had received them as sacred and under the protection of religion, took away all those pictures, and left naked and unsightly those walls whose decorations had remained inviolate for so many ages, and had escaped so many wars:
Marcellus, who had vowed that if he took Syracuse he would erect two temples at Rome, was unwilling to adorn the temple which he was going to build with these treasures which were his by right of capture; Verres, who was bound by no vows to Honour or Virtue, as Marcellus was, but only to Venus and to Cupid, attempted to plunder the temple of Minerva.
The one was unwilling to adorn gods in the spoil taken from gods, the other transferred the decorations of the virgin Minerva to the house of a prostitute.
Besides this, he took away out of the same temple twenty-seven more pictures beautifully painted;
among which were likenesses of the kings and tyrants of Sicily, which delighted one, not only by the skill of the painter, but also by reminding us of the men, and by enabling us to recognise their persons.
And see now, how much worse a tyrant this man proved to the Syracusans than any of the old ones, as they, cruel as they were, still adorned the temples of the immortal gods, while this man took away the monuments and ornaments from the gods.
But now what shall I say of the folding-doors of that temple?
I am afraid that those who have not seen these things may think that I am speaking too highly of, and exaggerating everything, though no one ought to suspect that I should be so inconsiderate as to be selling that so many men of the highest reputation, especially when they are judges in this cause, who have been at Syracuse, and who have seen all these things themselves, should be witnesses to my rashness and falsehood.
I am able to prove this distinctly, O judges, that no more magnificent doors, none more beautifully wrought of gold and ivory, ever existed in an, temple.
It is incredible how many Greeks have left written accounts of the beauty of these doors:
they, perhaps, may admire and extol them too much;
be it so, still it is more honourable for our republic, O judges, that our general, in a time of war, should have left those things which appeared to them so beautiful, than that our praetor should have carried them off in a time of peace.
On the folding-doors were some subjects most minutely executed in ivory;
all these he caused to be taken out;
he tore off and took away a very tine head of the Gorgon with snakes for hair;
and he showed, too, that he was influenced not only by admiration for the workmanship, but by a desire of money and gain;
for he did not hesitate to take away also all the golden knobs from these folding-doors, which were numerous and heavy;
and it was not the workmanship of these, but the weight which pleased him.
And so he left the folding-doors in such state, that, though they had formerly contributed greatly to the ornament of the temple, they now seemed to have been made only for the purpose of shutting it up.
Am I to speak also of the spears made of grass?
for I saw that you were excited at the name of them when the witnesses mentioned them.
They were such that it was sufficient to have seen them once, as there was neither any manual labour in them, nor any beauty, but simply an incredible size, which it would be quite sufficient even to hear of, and too much to see them more than once.
Did you covet even those?
For the Sappho which was taken away out of the town-hall affords you so reasonable an excuse, that it may seem almost allowable and pardonable.
That work of Silanion, so perfect, so elegant, so elaborate, (I will not say what private man, but) what nation could be so worthy to possess, as the most elegant and learned Verres?
Certainly, nothing will be said against it.
If any one of us, who are not as happy, who cannot be as refined as that man, should wish to behold anything of the sort, let him go to the temple of Good Fortune, to the monument of Catulus, to the portico of Metellus;
let him take pains to get admittance into the Tusculan villa of any one of those men;
let him see the forum when decorated, if Verres is ever so kind as to lend any of his treasures to the aediles.
Shall Verres have all these things at home?
shall Verres have his house full of his villas crammed with, the ornaments of temples and cities?
Will you still, O judges, bear with the hobby, as he calls it, and pleasures of this vile artisan?
a man who was born in such a rank, educated in such a way, and who is so formed both in mind and body, that he appears a much fitter person to take down statues than to appropriate them.
And how great a regret this Sappho which he carried off left behind her, can scarcely be told;
for in the first place it was admirably made, and, besides, it had a very noble Greek epigram engraved upon the pedestal;
and would not that learned man, that Grecian, who is such an acute judge of these matters, who is the only man who understands them, if he had understood one letter of Greek, have taken that away too?
for now, because it is engraved on an empty pedestal, it both declares what was once, on the pedestal, and proves that it has been taken away.
What shall I say more?
Did you not take away the statue of Paean from out of the temple of Aesculapius, beautifully made, sacred, and holy as it was?
a statue which all men went to see for its beauty, and worshipped for its sacred character.
What more?
was not the statue of Aristaeus openly taken away by your command out of the temple of Bacchus?
What more?
did you not take away out of the temple of Jupiter that most holy statue of Jupiter Imperator, most beautifully made?
What next?
did you hesitate to take away out of the temple of Libera, that most exquisite bust of Parian marble, which we used to go to see?
And that Paean used to be worshipped among that people together with Aesculapius, with anniversary sacrifices.
Aristaeus, who being, as the Greeks report, the son of Bacchus, is said to have been the inventor of oil, was consecrated among them together with his father Bacchus, in the same temple.
But how great do you suppose was the honour paid to Jupiter Imperator in his own temple?
You may collect it from this consideration, if you recollect how great was the religious reverence attached to that statue of the same appearance and form which Flaminius brought out of Macedonia, and placed in the Capitol.
In truth, there were said to be in the whole world three statues of Jupiter Imperator, of the same class, all beautifully made: one was that one from Macedonia, which we have seen in the Capitol; a second was the one at the narrow straits, which are the mouth of the Euxine Sea; the third was that which was at Syracuse, till Verres came as praetor.
Flaminius removed the first from its habitation, but only to place it in the Capitol, that is to say, in the house of Jupiter upon earth.
But as to the one that is at the entrance of the Euxine, that, though so many wars have proceeded from the shores of that sea, and though so many have been poured into Pontus, has still remained inviolate and untouched to this day.
This third one, which was at Syracuse, which Marcus Marcellus, when in arms and victorious, had seen, which he had spared to the religion of the place, which both the citizens of, and settlers in Syracuse were used to worship, and strangers not only visited, but often venerated, Caius Verres took away from the temple of Jupiter.
To return again to Marcellus.
Judge of the case, O judges, in this way;
think that more gods were lost to the Syracusans owing to the arrival of Verres, than even were owing to the victory of Marcellus.
In truth, he is said to have sought diligently for the great Archimedes, a man of the highest genius and skill, and to have been greatly concerned when he heard that he had been killed;
but that other man sought for everything which he did seek for, not for the purpose of preserving it, but of carrying it away.
At present, then, all those things which might appear more insignificant, I will on that account pass over how he took away Delphic tables made of marble, beautiful goblets of brass, an immense number of Corinthian vases, out of every saved temple at Syracuse;
and therefore, O judges, those men who are accustomed to take strangers about to all those things which are worth going to see, and to show them every separate thing, whom they call mystagogi, now have their description of things reversed;
for as they formerly used to show what there was in every place, so now they show what has been taken from every place.
What do you think, then?
Do you think that those men are affected with but a moderate indignation?
Not so, O judges:
in the first place, because all men are influenced by religious feeling, and think that their paternal gods, whom they have received from their ancestors, are to be carefully worshipped and retained by themselves;
and secondly, because this sort of ornament, these works and specimens of art, these statues and paintings, delight men of Greek extraction to an excessive degree;
therefore by their complaints we can understand that these things appear most bitter to those men, which perhaps may seem trifling and contemptible to us.
Believe me, O judges, although I am aware to a certainty that you yourselves hear the same things, that though both our allies and foreign nations have during these past years sustained many calamities and injuries, yet men of Greek extraction have not been, and are not, more indignant at any than at this ruthless plundering of their temples and altars.
Although that man may say that he bought these things, as he is accustomed to say, yet, believe me in this, O judges,
no city in all Asia or in all Greece has ever sold one statue, one picture, or one decoration of the city, of its own free will to anybody.
Unless, perchance, you suppose that, after strict judicial decisions had ceased to take place at Rome, the Greeks then began to sell these things, which they not only did not sell when there were courts of justice open, but which they even used to buy up;
or unless you think that Lucius Crassus, Quintus Scaevola, Caius Claudius, most, powerful men, whose most splendid aedileships we have seen had no dealings in those sort of matters with the Greeks, but that those men had such dealings who became aediles after the destruction of the courts of justice.
Know also that that false presence of purchase was more bitter to the cities than if any one were privately to filch things, or boldly to steal them and carry them off.
For they think it the most excessive baseness, that it should be entered on the public records that the city was induced by a price, and by a small price too, to sell and alienate those things which it had received from men of old.
In truth, the Greeks delight to a marvellous degree in those things, which we despise.
And therefore our ancestors willingly allowed those things to remain in numbers among the allies, in order that they might be as splendid and as flourishing as possible under our dominion; and among those nations whom they rendered taxable or tributary, still they left these things, in order that they who take delight in those things which to us seem insignificant, might have them as pleasures and consolations in slavery.
What do you think that the Rhegians, who now are Roman citizens, would take to allow that marble Venus to be taken from them?
What would the Tarentines take to lose the Europa sitting on the Bull? or the Satyr which they have in the temple of Vesta? or their other monuments?
What would the Thespians take to lose the statue of Cupid, the only object for which any one ever goes to see Thespiae?
What would the men of Cnidos take for their marble Venus? or the Coans for their picture of her? or the Ephesians for Alexander? the men of Cyzicus for their Ajax or Medea? What would the Rhodians take for Ialysus? the Athenians for their marble Bacchus, or their picture of Paralus, or their brazen Heifer, the work of Myron?
It would be a long business and an unnecessary one, to mention what is worth going to see among all the different nations in all Asia and Greece;
but that is the reason why I am enumerating these things, because I wish you to consider that an incredible indignation must be the feeling of those men from whose cities these things are carried away.
And to say nothing of other nations, judge of the Syracusans themselves.
For when I went to Syracuse, I originally believed what I had heard at Rome from that man's friends, that the city of Syracuse, on account of the inheritance of Heraclius, was no less friendly to him than the city of the Mamertines, because of their participation in all his booty and robberies.
And at the same time I was afraid that, owing to the influence of the high-born and beautiful women at whose will he had directed all the measures of his praetorship for three years, and of the men to whom they were married, I should be opposed not only by an excessive lenity, but even by a feeling of liberality towards that man, if I were to seek for any evidence out of the public records of the Syracusans.
Therefore when at Syracuse I was chiefly with Roman citizens; I copied out their papers; I inquired into their injuries.
As I was a long time occupied by that business, in order to rest a little and to give my mind a respite from care, I returned to those fine documents of Carpinatius;
in which, in company with some of the most honourable knights of the body of Roman settlers, I unraveled the case of those Verrutii, whom I have mentioned before, but I expected no aid at all, either publicly or privately, from the Syracusans, nor had I any idea of asking for any.
While I was doing this, on a sudden Heraclius came to me, who was in office at Syracuse, a man of high birth, who had been priest of Jupiter, which is the highest honour among the Syracusans;
he requests of me and of my brother, if we have no objection, to go to their senate;
that they were at that moment assembled in full numbers in the senate-house, and he said that he made this request to us to attend by command of the senate.
At first we were in doubt what to do;
but afterwards it soon occurred to us that we ought not to shun that assembly or that place.
Therefore we came to the senate-house;
they all rise at our entry to do us honour.
We sat down at the request of the magistrates.
Diodorus the son of Timarchides, who was the first man in that body both in influence and in age, and also as it seemed to me in experience and knowledge of business, began to speak;
and the first sentence of his speech was to this effect That the senate and people of Syracuse were grieved and indignant, that, though in all the other cities of Sicily I had informed the senate and people of what I proposed for their advantage or for their safety, and though I had received from them all commissions, deputies, letters and evidence, yet in that city I had done nothing of that sort.
I answered, that deputies from the Syracusans had not been present at Rome in that assembly of the Sicilians when my assistance was entreated by the common resolution of all the deputations, and when the cause of the whole of Sicily was entrusted to me; and that I could not ask that any decree should be passed against Caius Verres in that senate-house in which I saw a gilt statue of Caius Verres.
And after I said that, such a groaning ensued at the sight and mention of the statue, that it appeared to have been placed in the senate-house as a monument of his wickednesses and not of his services.
Then every one for himself, as fast as each could manage to speak, began to give me information of those things which I have just now mentioned;
to tell me that the city was plundered the temples stripped of their treasures that of the inheritance of Heraclius, which he had adjudged to the men of the palaestra, he had taken by far the greatest share himself;
and indeed, that they could not expect that he should care for the men of the palaestra, when he had taken away even the god who was the inventor of oil;
that that statue had neither been made at the public expense, nor erected by public authority, but that those men who had been the sharers in the plunder of the inheritance of Heraclius, had had it made and placed where it was;
and that those same men had been the deputies at Rome, who had been his assistants in dishonesty, his partners in his thefts and the witnesses of his debaucheries;
and that therefore I ought the less to wonder if they were wanting to the unanimity of the deputies and to the safety of Sicily.
When I perceived that their indignation at that man's injuries was not only not less, but almost greater than that of the rest of the Sicilians, then I explained my own intentions to them, and my whole plan and system with reference to the whole of the business which I had undertaken; then I exhorted them not to be wanting to the common cause and the common safety, and to rescind that panegyric which they had voted a few days before, being compelled, a, they said, by violence and fear.
Accordingly, O judges, the Syracusans, that man's clients and friends, do this.
First of all, they produce to me the public documents which they had carefully stored up in the most sacred part of the treasury;
in which they show me that everything, which I have said had been taken away, was entered, and even more things than I was able to mention.
And they were entered in this way.
"What had been taken out of the temple of Minerva. This, and that. What was missing out of the temple of Jupiter. What was missing out of the temple of Bacchus.
As each individual had had the charge of protecting and preserving those things, so it was entered; that each, when according to law he gave in his accounts, being bound to give up what he had received, had begged that he might be pardoned for the absence of these things and that all had accordingly been released from liability on that account, and that it was kept secret;
all which documents I took care to have sealed up with the public seal and brought away.
But concerning the public panegyric on him this explanation was given:
that at first, when the letters arrived from Verres about the panegyric, a little while before my arrival, nothing had been decreed;
and after that, when some of his friends urged them that it ought to be decreed, they were rejected with the greatest outcry and the bitterest reproaches;
but when I was on the point of arriving, then he who at that time was the chief governor had commanded them to decree it,
and that it had been decreed in such a manner that the panegyric did him more damage than it could have done him good.
So now, judges, do you receive the truth of that matter from me just as it was shown to me by them.
It is a custom at Syracuse, that, if a motion on any subject is brought before the senate, whoever wishes, gives his opinion on it.
No one is asked by name for his sentiments; nevertheless, those are accustomed to speak first of their own accord, and naturally, according as they are superior in honour or in age; and that precedence is yielded to them by the rest; but, if at any time all are silent, then they are compelled to speak by lot.
This was the custom when the motion was made respecting the panegyric of Verres.
On which subject at first great numbers speak, in order to delay coming to any vote, and interpose this objection, that formerly, when they had heard that there was a prosecution instituted against Sextus Peducaeus, who had deserved admirably well of that city and of the whole province, and when, in return for his numerous and important services, they wished to vote a panegyric on him, they had been prohibited from doing so by Caius Verres;
and that it would be an unjust thing, although Peducaeus had now no need of their praise, still not to vote that which at one time they had been eager to vote, before decreeing what they would only decree from compulsion.
All shout in assent, and say approvingly that that is what ought to be done.
So the question about Peducaeus is put to the senate.
Each man gave his opinion in order, according as he had precedence in age and honour.
You may learn this from the resolution itself;
for the opinions delivered by the chief men are generally recorded.
It says who were the chief supporters of the motion.
The vote is carried.
Then the question about Verres is put.
Tell me, I pray, what happened.
Well what comes next?
What is this?
Why was this?
Was no one a willing praiser of your praetorship, or a willing defender of you from danger, especially when by being so he might have gained favour with the praetor?
No one.
Those very men who used to feast with you, your advisers and accomplices, did not venture to utter a word.
In that very senate-house in which a statue of yourself and a naked statue of your son were standing, was there no one whom even your naked son in a province stripped naked could move to compassion?
Moreover they inform me also of this, that they had passed the vote of panegyric in such a form that all men might see that it was not a panegyric, but rather a satire, to remind every one of his shameful and disastrous praetorship.
For in truth it was drawn up in these words.
From which you are to understand, that he had caused most noble and innocent men to be executed.
when all his vigils were well known to have been devoted to debauchery and adultery;
moreover, there was this clause added, which the defendant could never venture to produce, and the accuser would never cease to dwell upon;
men who in his time had entered even into the "island" of Syracuse.
And after I had received this information from them, I departed from the senate-house with my brother, in order that they might decree what they chose. Immediately they pass a decree. First, "That my brother Lucius should be connected with the city by ties of hospitably;" because he had shown the same goodwill to the Syracusans that I had always felt myself.
That they not only wrote at that time, but also had engraved on brazen tablets and presented to us.
Truly very fond of you are your Syracusans whom you are always talking of, who think it quite a sufficient reason for forming an intimate connection with your accuser, that he is going to be your accuser, and that he has come among them for the purpose of prosecuting inquiries against you.
After that, a decree is passed, not with any difference of opinion, but almost unanimously, "That the panegyric which had been decreed to Caius Verres, be rescinded."
But, when not only the vote had been come to, but when it had even been drawn up in due form and entered in the records, an appeal is made to the praetor.
But who makes this appeal?
Any magistrate?
No.
Any senator?
Not even that.
Any Syracusan?
Far from it.
Who, then, appeals to the praetor?
The man who had been Verres's quaestor, Caesetius.
Oh, the ridiculous business!
Oh, the deserted man!
O man despaired of and abandoned by the Sicilian magistracy!
In order to prevent the Sicilians passing a resolution of the senate, or from obtaining their rights according to their own customs and their own laws, an appeal is made to the praetor, not by any friend of his, not by any connection, not, in short, by any Sicilian, but by his own quaestor.
Who saw this? Who heard it?
That just and wise praetor orders the senate to be adjourned.
A great multitude flocks to me.
First of all, the senators cry out that their rights are being taken away; that their liberty is being taken away. The people praise the senate and thank them. The Roman citizens do not leave me.
And on that day I had no harder task, than with all my exertions to prevent violent hands being laid on the man who made that appeal.
When we had gone before the praetor's tribunal, he deliberates, forsooth, diligently and carefully what decision he shall give;
for, before I say one word, he rises from his seat and departs.
And so we departed from the forum when it was now nearly evening.
The next day, the first thing in the morning, I beg of him to allow the Syracusans to give me a copy of the resolution which they had passed the day before.
But he refuses, and says that it is a great shame for me to have made a speech in a Greek senate;
and that, as for my having spoken in the Greek language to Greeks, that was a thing which could not be endured at all.
I answered the man as I could, as I chose, and as I ought.
Among other things, I recollect that I said that it was easy to be seen how great was the difference between him and the great Numidicus, the real and genuine Metellus.
That that man had refused to assist with his panegyric Lucius Lucullus, his sister's husband, with whom he was on the very best terms, but that he was procuring panegyrics from cities for a man totally unconnected with himself, by violence and compulsion.
But when I understood that it was many recent messengers, and many letters, not of introduction but of credit, that had had so much influence over him, at the suggestion of the Syracusans themselves I make a seizure of those documents in which the resolutions of the senate were recorded.
And now behold a fresh confusion and strife.
That, however, you may not suppose that he was without any friends or connections at Syracuse, that he was entirely desolate and forsaken, a man of the name of Theomnastus, a man ridiculously crazy, whom the Syracusans call Theoractus, attempted to detain those documents;
a man in such a condition, that the boys follow him, and that every one laughs at him every time he opens his mouth.
But his craziness, which is ridiculous to others, was then in truth very troublesome to me.
For while he was foaming at the mouth, his eyes glaring, and he crying out as loud as he could that I was attacking him with violence, we came together before the tribunal.
Then I began to beg to be allowed to seal up and carry away the records.
He spoke against me; he denied that there had been any regular resolution of the senate passed, since an appeal had been made to the praetor.
He said that a copy of it ought not to be given to me.
I read the act, that I was to be allowed all documents and records.
He, like a crazy man as he was, urged that our laws had nothing to do with him.
That intelligent praetor decided that he did not choose, as the resolution of the senate had no business ever to be ratified, to allow me to take a copy of it to Rome.
Not to make a long story of it,
if I had not threatened the man vigorously, if I had not read to him the provisions of the act passed in this case, and the penalties enacted by it, I should not have been allowed to have the documents.
But that crazy fellow, who had declaimed against me most violently on behalf of Verres, when he found he did not succeed, in order I suppose to recover my favour, gives me a book in which all Verres's Syracusan thefts were set down, which I had already been informed of by, and had a list of from them.
 Now, then, let the Mamertines praise you, who are the only men of all that large province who wish you to get off, but let them praise you on condition that Heius, who is the chief man of that deputation, is present; let them praise you on condition that they are here, ready to reply to me on those points concerning which they are questioned.
And that they may not be taken by surprise on a sudden, this is what I shall ask them:
Are they bound to furnish a ship to the Roman people?
They will admit it.
Have they supplied it while Verres was praetor?
They will say, No.
Have they built an enormous transport at the public expense which they have given to Verres?
They will not be able to deny it.
Has Verres taken grain from them to send to the Roman people, as his predecessor did?
They will say, No.
What soldiers or sailors have they furnished during those three years?
They will say they furnished none at all.
They will not be able to deny that Messana has been the receiver of all his plunder and all his robberies.
They will confess that an immense quantity of things were exported from that city; and besides that, that this large vessel given to him by the Mamertines, departed loaded when the praetor left Sicily.
You are welcome, then, to that panegyric of the Mamertines.
As for the city of Syracuse, we see that that feels towards you as it has been treated by you; and among them that infamous Verrean festival, instituted by you, has been abolished.
In truth, it was a most unseemly thing for honours such as belong to the gods to be paid to the man who had carried off the images of the gods.
In truth, that conduct of the Syracusans would be deservedly reproached, If, when they had struck a most celebrated and solemn day of festival games out of their annals, because on that day Syracuse was said to have been taken by Marcellus, they should, notwithstanding, celebrate a day of festival in the name of Verres;
though he had plundered the Syracusans of all which that day of disaster had left them.
But observe the shamelessness and arrogance of the man, O judges, who not only instituted this disgraceful and ridiculous Verrean festival out of the money of Heraclius, but who also ordered the Marcellean festival to be abolished,
in order that they might every year offer sacrifices to the man by whose means they had lost the sacred festivals which they had ever observed, and had lost their national deities, and that they might take away the festival days in honour of that family by whose means they had recovered all their other festivals.
The two things which have the greatest influence in a state, namely, the greatest interest, and eloquence, are both making against us at the present moment;
and while I am awed by the one, O Caius Aquillius, I am in fear of the other:
I am somewhat awed, apprehending that the eloquence of Quinctius Hortensius may embarrass me in speaking;
but I am in no slight fear lest the interest of Sextus Naevius may injure Publius Quinctius.
And yet it would not seem so disastrous for us that these things should exist in the highest degree in the other party, if they existed also to a moderate extent in us; but the fact is, that I, who have neither sufficient experience nor much ability, am brought into comparison with a most eloquent advocate; and that Publius Quinctius, who has but small influence, no riches, and few friends, is contending with a most influential adversary.
And, moreover, we have this additional disadvantage, that Marcus Junius, who has several times pleaded this cause before you, O Aquillius, a man practised in the conduct of other causes also, and much and frequently concerned in this particular one, is at this moment absent, being engaged on his new commission;
and so they have had recourse to me, who, even if I had all other requisite qualifications in ever so high a degree, have certainly scarcely had time enough to be able to understand so important a business, having so many points of dispute involved in it
so that also, which has been used to be an assistance to me in other causes, is wanting to me in this one;
for in proportion to my want of ability, have I endeavoured to make amends for that want by industry,
and unless time and space be given to one, it cannot be seen how great his industry is.
But the greater our disadvantages, O Caius Aquillius, are, with so much the more favourable a disposition ought you, and those who are your colleagues in this trial, to listen to our words, that the truth, though weakened by many disadvantages, may be at last reestablished by the equity of such men as you.
But if you, being the judge, shall appear to be no protection to a desolate and helpless condition against power and influence;
if before this tribunal the cause is found to depend on interest, not on truth;
then indeed there is nothing any longer holy and uncontaminated in the state no hope that the firmness and virtue of the judge may counterbalance the lowly condition of any one.
But undoubtedly before you and your colleagues truth will prevail, or else, if it be driven from this place by power and influence, it will not be able to find any place where it can stand.
I do not say this, O Caius Aquillius, because I have any doubt of your own good faith and constancy, or because Publius Quinctius ought not to have the greatest hopes from those whom you have called in as your assessors, being, as they are, among the most eminent men in the state.
What then?
In the first place, the magnitude of the danger causes a man the greatest fear, because he is staking all his fortunes on one trial;
and while he is thinking of this, the recollection of your power does not occur to his mind less frequently than that of your justice;
because all men whose lives are in another's hand more frequently think of what he, in whose power and under whose dominion they are, can do, than of what he ought to do,
Secondly, Publius Quinctius has for his adversary, in name indeed, Sextus Naevius, but in reality, the most eloquent, the most gallant, the most accomplished men of our state, who are defending Sextus Naevius with one common zeal, and with all their power:
if, indeed, defending means so to comply with the desire of another, that he may the more easily be able to overwhelm whomsoever he chooses by an unjust trial;
for what, O Caius Aquillius, can be mentioned or spoken of more unjust or more unworthy than this, that I who am defending the liberties, the fame, and fortunes of another should be compelled to open the cause,
especially when Quintus Hortensius, who in this trial fills the part of the accuser, is to speak against me;
a man to whom nature has given the greatest possible fluency and energy in speaking?
Matters are so managed, that I, who ought rather to ward off the darts of our adversary and to heal the wounds he has inflicted, am compelled to do so now, even when the adversary has cast no dart; and that that time is given to them to attack us when the power of avoiding their attacks is to be taken from us; and if in any particular they should (as they are well prepared to do) cast any false accusation like a poisoned arrow at us, there will be no opportunity for applying a remedy.
That has happened through the injustice and wrong-doing of the praetor;
first, because, contrary to universal custom, he has chosen that the trial as to honour or infamy should take place before the one concerning the fact;
secondly, because he has so arranged this very trial, that the defendant is compelled to plead his cause before he has heard a word of the accuser's;
and this has been done because of the influence and power of those men who indulge the violence and covetousness of Sextus Naevius as eagerly as if their own property or honour were at stake, and who make experiment of their influence in such matters as this, in which the more weight they have through their virtue and nobility, the less they ought to make a parade of what influence they have.
Since Publius Quinctius, involved in and overwhelmed by such numerous and great difficulties, has taken refuge, O Caius Aquillius, in your good faith, in your truth, in your compassion;
when, up to this time, owing to the might of his adversaries, no equal law could be found for him, no equal liberty of pleading, no just magistrate, when, through the greatest injustice, everything was unfavourable and hostile to him;
he now prays and entreats you, O Caius Aquillius, and all of you who are present as assessors, to allow justice, which has been tossed about and agitated by many injuries, at length to find rest and a firm footing in this place.
And that you may the more easily do this, I will endeavour to make you understand how this matter has been managed and carried out.
Caius Quinctius was the brother of this Publius Quinctius;
in other respects a sufficiently prudent and attentive head of a family, but in one matter a little less wise, inasmuch as he formed a partnership with Sextus Naevius, a respectable man, but one who had not been brought up so as to be acquainted with the rights of partnership, or with the duties of a head of an established family.
Not that he was wanting in abilities; for Sextus Naevius as a buffoon was never considered without wit, nor as a crier was he reckoned unmannerly.
What followed?
As nature had given him nothing better than a voice, and his father had left him nothing besides his freedom, he made gain of his voice, and used his freedom for the object of being loquacious with impunity.
So there was no reason in the world for your taking him as a partner, except that he might learn with your money what a harvest money can produce.
Nevertheless, induced by acquaintance and intimacy with the man, Quinctius, as I have said, entered into a partnership with him as to those articles which were procured in Gaul.
He had considerable property in cattle, and a well-cultivated and productive farm.
Naevius is carried off from the halls of Licinius, and from the gang of criers, into Gaul and across the Alps;
there is a great change in his situation, none in his disposition;
for he who from his boyhood had been proposing to himself gain without any outlay, as soon as he spent anything himself and brought it to the common stock, could not be content with a moderate profit.
Nor is it any wonder if he, who had his voice for sale, thought that those things which he had acquired by his voice would be a great profit to him;
so that without much moderation, he carried off whatever he could from the common stock to his private house for himself.
And in this he was as industrious as if all who behaved in a partnership with exact good faith, were usually condemned in a trial before an arbitrator.
But concerning these matters I do not consider it necessary to say what Publius Quinctius wishes me to mention;
although the cause calls for it: yet as it only calls for it, and does not absolutely require it, I will pass it over.
When this partnership had now subsisted many years, and when Naevius had often been suspected by Quinctius, and was not able conveniently to give an account of the transactions which he had carried on according to his caprice, and not on any system,
Quinctius dies in Gaul, when Naevius was there too, and dies suddenly.
By his will he left this Publius Quinctius his heir, in order that, as great grief would come to him by his death, great honour should also accrue to him.
When he was dead, Publius Quinctius soon after goes into Gaul.
There he lives on terms of intimacy with that fellow Naevius.
There they are together nearly a year, during which they had many communications with one another about their partnership, and about the whole of their accounts and their estate in Gaul;
nor during that time did Naevius utter one single word about either the partnership owing him anything, or about Quinctius having owed him anything on his private account.
As there was some little debt left behind, the payment of which was to be provided for at Rome,
this Publius Quinctius issues notices that he shall put up to auction in Gaul, at Narbonne, those things which were his own private property.
On this, this excellent man, Sextus Naevius, dissuades the man by many speeches from putting the things up to auction,
he said that he would not be able at that time to sell so conveniently what he had advertised.
That he had a sum of money at Rome, which if Quinctius were wise he would consider their common property, from their brotherly intimacy, and also from his relationship with himself;
for Naevius has married the cousin of Publius Quinctius, and has children by her.
Because Naevius was saying just what a good man ought, Quinctius believed that he who imitated the language of good men, would imitate also their actions.
He gives up the idea of having an auction; he goes to Rome; at the same time Naevius also leaves Gaul for Rome.
As Caius Quinctius had owed money to Publius Scapula, Publius Quinctius referred it to you, O Caius Aquillius, to decide what he should pay his children.
He preferred submitting to your decision in this matter, because, on account of the difference in the exchange,
it was not sufficient to look in his books and see how much was owed, unless he had inquired at the temple of Castor how much was to be paid in Roman money.
You decide and determine, on account of the friendship existing between you and the family of the Scapulae, what was to be paid to them to a penny.
All these things Quinctius did by the advice and at the instigation of Naevius:
nor is there anything strange in his adopting the advice of the man whose assistance he thought at his service.
For not only had he promised it in Gaul, but every day he kept on saying at Rome that he would pay the money as soon as he gave him a hint to do so.
Quinctius moreover saw that he was able to do so.
He knew that he ought; he did not think that he was telling lies, because there was no reason why he should tell lies.
He arranged, therefore, that he would pay the Scapulae as if he had the money at home.
He gives Naevius notice of it, and asks him to provide for the payment as he had said he would.
Then that worthy man I hope he will not think I am laughing at him if I call him again a most worthy man as he thought that he was brought into a great strait, hoping to pin him down to his own terms at the very nick of time, says that he will not pay a penny,
unless a decision is first come to about all the affairs and accounts of the partnership, and unless he knew that there would be no dispute between him and Quinctius.
We will look into these matters at a future time, says Quinctius,
but at present I wish you to provide, if you please, what you said you would.
He says that he will not do so on any other condition; and that what he had promised no more concerned him, than it would if when he was holding a sale by auction, he had made any bidding at the command of the owner.
Quinctius being perplexed at this desertion, obtains a few days' delay from the Scapulae;
he sends into Gaul to have those things sold which he had advertised;
being absent, he sells them at a less favourable time than before;
he pays the Scapulae with more disadvantage to himself than he would have done.
Then of his own accord he calls Naevius to account, in order, since he suspected that there would be a dispute about something, to provide for the termination of the business as soon as possible, and with the smallest possible trouble.
He appoints as his umpire his friend Marcus Trebellius;
we name a common friend, a relation of our own, Sextus Alphenus, who had been brought up in his house, and with whom he was exceedingly intimate.
No agreement could be come to; because the one was willing to put up with a slight loss, but the other was not content with a moderate booty.
So from that time the matter was referred to legal decision.
After many delays, and when much time had been wasted in that business, and nothing had been done, Naevius appeared before the judge.
I beseech you, O Caius Aquillius, and you the assessors in this suit, to observe carefully, in order that you may be able to understand the singular nature of this fraud, and the new method of trickery employed.
He says that he had had a sale by auction in Gaul; that he had sold what he thought fit; that he had taken care that the partnership should owe him nothing; that he would have no more to do with summoning any one, or with giving security; if Quinctius had any business to transact with him, he had no objection.
He, as he was desirous to revisit his farm in Gaul, does not summon the man at present; so he departs without giving security.
After that, Quinctius remains at Rome
He gets any securities which he had given other people respited, so as to be able to go without hindrance into Gaul.
I beg of you to remember the day.
Lucius Albius the son of Sextus of the Quirine tribe, a good man and of the highest reputation for honour, set out with him.
When they had come to the place called the fords of Volaterra,
they see a great friend of Naevius, who was bringing him some slaves from Gaul to be sold, Lucius Publicius by name,
who when he arrived in Rome told Naevius in what place he had seen Quinctius.
Then he sends his slaves round to his friends;
he summons himself all his associates from the halls of Licinius and from the jaws of the shambles,
and he entreats them to come to the booth of Sextus by the second hour of the next day.
They come in crowds;
he makes oath that Publius Quinctius has not appeared to his bail, and that he has appeared to his.
A long protest to this effect is sealed with the seals of noble men.
They depart:
Naevius demands of Burrienus the praetor, that by his edict he may take possession of Quinctius's goods.
He urged the confiscation of the property of that man with whom he had had intimacy, with whom he actually was in partnership, between whom and himself there was a relationship, which while his children lived could not possibly be annulled.
From which act it could easily be perceived that there is no bond so holy and solemn, that avarice is not in the habit of weakening and violating it.
In truth, if friendship is kept up by truth, society by good faith, relationship by affection, it is inevitable that he who has endeavoured to despoil his friend, his partner, and his relation of fame and fortune, should confess himself worthless and perfidious and impious.
Sextus Alphenus, the agent of Publius Quinctius, the intimate friend and relation of Sextus Naevius, tears down the bills;
he carries off one little slave whom Naevius had laid hold of;
he gives notice that he is the agent, and that it is only fair that that fellow should consult the fame and fortunes of Publius Quinctius, and await his arrival.
But if he would not do so, and believed that by such methods he could bring him into the conditions which he proposed,
then he asked nothing as a favour, and if Naevius chose to go to law, he would defend him at the trial.
While this is being done at Rome, meantime Quinctius, contrary to law and to custom, and to the edicts of the praetors, is driven by force by the slaves which belonged to both him and Naevius, as partners, from their common lands and estates.
Think, O Caius Aquillius, that Naevius did everything at Rome with moderation and good sense,
if this which was done in Gaul in obedience to his letters was done rightly and legally.
Quinctius being expelled and turned out of his farm, having received a most notorious injury, flies to Caius Flaccus the general,
who was at that time in the province;
whom I name to do him honour as his dignity demands.
How strongly he was of opinion that that action called for punishment you will be able to learn from his decrees.
Meantime Alphenus was fighting every day at Rome with that old gladiator.
He had the people indeed on his side, because that fellow never ceased to aim at the head.
Naevius demanded that the agent should give security for payment on judgment being given.
Alphenus says that it is not reasonable for an agent to give security, because the defendant would not be bound to give security if he were present himself.
The tribunes are appealed to,
and as a positive decision was demanded from them, the matter is terminated on the footing of Sextus Alphenus undertaking that Publius Quinctius should answer to his bail.
Quinctius comes to Rome; he answers to his bail.
That fellow, that most energetic man, the seizer of other men's goods, that invader, that robber, for a year and a half asks for nothing, keeps quiet,
he amuses this man by proposals as long as he can,
and at last he demands of Cnaeus Dolabella, the praetor, that Quinctius should give security for payment on judgment being given, according to the formula, "Because he demands it of him whose goods he has taken possession of, according to the edict of the praetor."
Quinctius made no objection to his ordering him to give security, if his goods had been possessed, in accordance with the praetor's edict.
He makes the order;
how just a one I do not say this alone I do say, it was unprecedented:
and I would rather not have said even this, since any one could have understood both its characters.
He orders Publius Quinctius to give security to Sextus Naevius, to try the point whether his goods had been taken possession of, in accordance with the edict of the praetor.
The friends who were then with Quinctius objected to this:
they showed that a decision ought to be come to as to the fact, so that either each should give security to the other, or else that neither should;
that there was no necessity for the character of either being involved in the trial.
Moreover, Quinctius himself cried out that he was unwilling to give security, lest by so doing he should seem to admit that his goods had been taken possession of in accordance with the edict:
besides, if he gave a bond in that manner, he should be forced (as has now happened) to speak first in a trial affecting himself capitally.
Dolabella (as high-born men are wont to do, who, whether they have begun to act rightly or wrongly, carry either conduct to such a height that no one born in our rank of life can overtake them) perseveres most bravely in committing injustice:
he bids him either give security or give a bond;
and meantime he orders our advocates, who objected to this, to be removed with great roughness.
Quinctius departs much embarrassed;
and no wonder, when so miserable a choice was offered him, and one so unjust, that he must either himself convict himself of a capital offence if he gave security, or open the cause himself in a capital trial if he gave a bond.
As in the one case there was no reason why he should pass an unfavourable sentence on himself
(for sentence passed by oneself is the hardest sentence of all),
but in the other case there was hope of coming before such a man as a judge, as would show him the more favour the more without interest he was,
he preferred to give a bond.
He did so.
He had you, O Caius Aquillius, for the judge;
he pleaded according to his bond;
in what I have now mid consists the sum and the whole of the present trial.
You see, O Caius Aquillius, that it is a trial touching not the property of Publius Quinctius, but his fame and fortunes.
Though our ancestors have determined that he who is pleading for his life should speak last,
you see that we, owing to this unprecedented accusation of the prosecutor's, are pleading our cause first.
Moreover, you see that those who are more accustomed to defend people are today acting as accusers; and that those talents are turned to do people injury, which have hitherto been employed in ministering to men's safety, and in assisting them.
There remained but one thing more, which they put in execution yesterday, namely, to proceed against you for the purpose of compelling you to limit the time allowed us for making our defence;
and this they would easily have obtained from the praetor if you had not taught him what your rights and duties and business were.
Nor was there any longer any assistant left to us but yourself by whose means we could obtain our rights against them.
Nor was it even enough for them to obtain that which might be justified to everybody;
so trifling and insignificant a thing do they think power to be which is not exercised with injustice.
But since Hortensius urges you to come to a decision, and requires of use that I should not waste time in speaking, and complains that when the former advocate was defending this action it never could be brought to a conclusion,
I will not allow that suspicion to continue to exist, that we are unwilling for the matter to be decided, nor will I arrogate to myself a power of proving the case better than it has been proved before;
nor yet will I make a long speech, because the cause has already been explained by him who has spoken before, and brevity, which is exceedingly agreeable to me, is required of me, who am neither able to devise nor to utter many arguments.
I will do what I have often observed you do, O Hortensius;
I will distribute my argument on the entire cause into certain divisions. You always do so, because you are always able.
I will do so in this cause, because in this cause I think I can.
That power which nature gives you of being always able to do so, this cause gives me, so that I am able to do so today.
I will appoint myself certain bounds and limits, out of which I cannot stray if I ever so much wish; so that both I may have a subject on which I may speak, and Hortensius may have allegations which he may answer, and you, O Caius Aquillius, may be able to perceive beforehand what topics you are going to hear discussed.
We say, O Sextus Naevius, that you did not take possession of the goods of Publius Quinctius in accordance with the edict of the praetor.
I will show first, that there was no cause why you should require of the praetor power to take possession of the goods of Publius Quinctius;
in the second place, that you could not have taken possession of them according to the edict; lastly, that you did not take possession of them.
I entreat you, O Caius Aquillius, and you too the assessors, to preserve carefully in your recollections what I have undertaken.
You will more easily comprehend the whole business if you recollect this;
and you will easily recall me by the expression of your opinion if I attempt to overstep those barriers to which I have confined myself.
I say that there was no reason why he should make the demand;
I say that he could not have taken possession according to the edict;
I say that he did not take possession.
When I have proved thee three things, I will sum up the whole.
There was no reason why you should make the demand,
How can this be proved?
Because Quinctius owed nothing whatever to Sextus Naevius, neither on account of the partnership, nor from any private debt.
Who is a witness of this?
Why, the same man who is our most bitter enemy.
In this matter I will cite you you, I say, O Naevius,
as our witness Quinctius was with you in Gaul a year, and more than that, after the death of Caius Quinctius.
Prove that you ever demanded of him this vast sum of money, I know not how much;
prove that you ever mentioned it, ever said it was owing,
and I will admit that he owed it.
Caius Quinctius dies; who, as you say, owed you a large sum for some particular articles.
His heir, Publius Quinctius, comes into Gaul to you, to your joint estate comes to that place where not only the property was, but also all the accounts and all the books.
Who would have been so careless in his private affairs, who so negligent, who so unlike you, O Sextus, us not, when the effects were gone from his hands who had contracted the debt, and had become the property of his heir, to inform the heir of it as soon as he saw him? to apply for the money? to give in his account?
and if anything were disputed, to arrange it either in a friendly manner, or by the intervention of strict law?
Is it not so?
that which the best men do, those who wish their relations and friends to be affectionate towards them and honourable, would Sextus Naevius not do that, he who so burns, who is so hurried away by avarice, that he is unwilling to give up any part of his own property, lest he should leave some fraction to be any credit or advantage to this his near relation.
And would he not demand the money, if any were owing, who, because that was not paid which was never owed, seeks to take away not the money only, but even the life of his relation?
You were unwilling, I suppose, to be troublesome to him whom you will not allow even to live as a free man!
You were unwilling at that time modestly to ask that man for money, whom you now will nefariously to murder!
I suppose so.
You were unwilling, or you did not dare, to ask a man who was your relation, who had a regard for you, a good man, a temperate man, a man older than yourself.
Often (as sometimes happens with men), when you had fortified yourself, when you had determined to mention the money, when you had come ready prepared and having considered the matter, you being a nervous man, of virgin modesty, on a sudden checked yourself, your voice failed you, you did not dare to ask him for money whom you wished to ask, lest he should be unwilling to hear you.
No doubt that was it.
Let us believe this, that Sextus Naevius spared the ears of the man whose life he is attacking!
If he had owed you money, O Sextus, you would have asked for it at once;
if not at once, at all events soon after;
if not soon after, at least after a time;
in six months I should think;
beyond all doubt at the close of the year:
but for a year and a half, when you had every day an opportunity of reminding the man of the debt, you say not one word about it;
but now, when nearly two years have passed, you ask for the money.
What profligate and extravagant spendthrift, even before his property is diminished, but while it is still abundant, would have been so reckless as Sextus Naevius was?
When I name the man, I seem to myself to have said enough.
Caius Quinctius owed you money;
you never asked for it:
he died;
his property came to his heir;
though you saw him every day, you did not ask for it for two years;
will any one doubt which is the more probable, that Sextus Naevius would instantly have asked for what was owed to him, or that be would not have asked for two years?
Had he no opportunity of asking?
Why, he lived with you more than a year:
could no measures be taken in Gaul?
But there was law administered in the province, and trials were taking place at Rome.
The only alternative remaining is, either extreme carelessness prevented you, or extraordinary liberality.
If you call it carelessness, we shall wonder;
if you call it kindness, we shall laugh;
and what else you can call it I know not;
it is proof enough that nothing was owing to Naevius, that for such a length of time he asked for nothing.
What if I show that this very thing which he is now doing is a proof that nothing is due?
For what is Sextus Naevius doing now?
About what is there a dispute?
What is this trial on which we have now been occupied two years?
What is the important business with which he is wearying so many eminent men?
He is asking for his money.
What now, at last?
But let him ask; let us hear what he has to say.
He wishes a decision to be come to concerning the accounts and disputes of the partnership.
It is very late.
However, better late than never;
let us grant it.
Oh, says be, I do not want that now, O Caius Aquillius;
and I am not troubling myself about that now:
Publius Quinctius has had the use of my money for so many years;
let him use it, I do not ask anything.
What then are you contending for?
is it with that object that you have often announced in many places that he may no longer be a citizen?
that he may not keep that rank which hitherto he has most honourably preserved?
that be may not be counted among the living?
that he may be in peril of his life and all his honours?
that he may have to plead his cause before the plaintiff speaks, and that when he has ended his speech he may then hear the voice of his accuser?
What?
What is the object of this?
That you may the quicker arrive at your rights?
But if you wished that might be already done.
That you may contend according to a more respectable form of procedure?
But you cannot murder Publius Quinctius your own relation, without the greatest wickedness.
But neither does Caius Aquillius willingly decide on the life of another, nor has Quintus Hortensius been in the habit of pleading against a man's life.
But what reply is made by us, O Caius Aquillius?
He asks for his money:
we deny that it is due.
Let a trial take place instantly;
we make no objection;
is there anything more?
If he is afraid that the money will not be forth coming when the decision is given let him take security that it shall be;
and let him give security for what I demand in the very same terms in which we give security.
The matter can be terminated at once, O Caius Aquillius
You can at once depart, being delivered from an annoyance, I had almost said, no less than that Quinctius is exposed to.
What are we doing, Hortensius?
what are we to say of this condition?
Can we, some time or other, laying aside our weapons, discuss the money matter without hazard of any one's fortunes?
Can we so prosecute our business, as to leave the life of our relation in safety?
Can we adopt the character of a plaintiff, and lay aside that of an accuser?
Yes, says he, I will take security from you, but I will not give you security.
But who is it that lays down for us these very reasonable conditions?
who determines this that what is just towards Quinctius is unjust towards Naevius?
The goods of Quinctius, says he, were taken possession of in accordance with the edict of the praetor.
You demand then, that I should admit that; that we should establish by our own sentence, as having taken place, that which we go to trial expressly to prove never did take place.
Can no means be found, O Caius Aquillius, for a man's arriving at his rights as expeditiously as maybe without the disgrace and infamy and ruin of any one else?
Forsooth, if anything were owed, he would ask for it: he would not prefer that all sorts of trials should take place, rather than that one from which all these arise.
He, who for so many years never even asked Quinctius for the money, when he had an opportunity of transacting business with him every day;
he who, from the time when he first began to behave ill, has wasted all the time in adjournments and respiting the recognizances;
he who, after he had withdrawn his recognizance drove Quinctius by treachery and violence from their joint estate;
who, when he had ample opportunity, without any one's making objection, to try a civil action, chose rather a charge that involved infamy;
who, when he is brought back to this tribunal, whence all these proceedings arise, repudiates the most reasonable proposals;
confesses that he is aiming, not at the money, but at the life and heart's blood of his adversary;
does he not openly say, "if anything were owing to me, I should demand it, and I should long ago have obtained it;
I would not employ so much trouble, so unpopular a course of legal proceeding, and such a band of favourers of my cause,
if I had to make a just demand;
I have got to extort money from one unwilling, and in spite of him;
I have got to tear and squeeze out of a man what he does not owe;
Publius Quinctius is to be cast down from all his fortune;
every one who is powerful, or eloquent, or noble, must be brought into court with me;
a force must be put upon truth, threats must be bandied about, dangers must be threatened;
terrors must be brandished before his eyes, that being cowed and overcome by these things, he may at last yield of his own accord."
And, in truth, all these things, when I see who are striving against us, and when I consider the party sitting opposite to me, seem to be impending over, and to be present to us, and to be impossible to be avoided by any means.
But when, O Caius Aquillius, I bring my eyes and my mind back to you, the greater the labour and zeal with which all these things are done, the more trifling and powerless do I think them.
Quinctius then owed nothing, as you prove yourself.
But what if he had owed you anything?
would that have at once been a reason for your requiring leave from the praetor to take possession of his goods?
I think that was neither according to law, nor expedient for any one.
What then does he prove?
He says that he had forfeited his recognizances.
Before I prove that he had not done so, I choose, O Caius Aquillius, to consider both the fact itself and the conduct of Sextus Naevius, with reference to the principles of plain duty, and the common usages of men.
He, as you say, had not appeared to his recognizances;
he with whom you were connected by relationship, by partnership, by every sort of bond and ancient intimacy.
Was it decent for you to go at once to the praetor?
was it fair for you at once to demand to be allowed to take possession of his goods according to the edict?
Did you betake yourself to these extreme measures and to these most hostile laws with such eagerness as to leave yourself nothing behind which you might be able to do still more bitter and cruel?
For, what could happen more shameful to any human being, what more miserable or more bitter to a man;
what disgrace could happen so heavy, what disaster can be imagined so intolerable?
If fortune deprived any one of money, or if the injustice of another took it from him, still while his reputation is unimpeached,
honour easily makes amends for poverty.
And some men, though stained with ignominy, or convicted in discreditable trials, still enjoy their wealth;
are not forced to dance attendance (which is the most wretched of all states) on the power of another;
and in their distresses they are relieved by this support and comfort;
but he whose goods have been sold, who has seen not merely his ample estates, but even his necessary food and clothing put up under the hammer, with great disgrace to himself;
he is not only erased from the list of men, but he is removed out of sight, if possible, even beneath the dead.
An honourable death forsooth often sets off even a base life, but a dishonoured life leaves no room to hope for even an honourable death.
Therefore, in truth, when a man's goods are taken possession of according to the praetor's edict, all his fame and reputation is seized at the same time with his goods.
A man about whom placards are posted in the most frequented places, is not allowed even to perish in silence and obscurity;
a man who has assignees and trustees appointed to pronounce to him on what terms and conditions he is to be ruined;
a man about whom the voice of the crier makes proclamation and proclaims his price, he has a most bitter funeral procession while he is alive,
if that may be considered a funeral in which men meet not as friends to do honour to his obsequies, but purchasers of his goods as executioners, to tear to pieces and divide the relics of his existence.
Therefore our ancestors determined that such a thing should seldom happen;
the praetors have taken care that it should only happen after deliberation;
good men, even when fraud is openly committed, when there is no opportunity of trying the case at law, still have recourse to this measure timidly and hesitatingly;
not till they are compelled by force and necessity, unwillingly, when the recognizances have often been forfeited, when they have been often deceived and outwitted.
For they consider how serious a matter it is to confiscate the property of another.
A good man is unwilling to slay another, even according to law;
for he would rather say that he had saved when he might have destroyed, than that he had destroyed when he could have saved.
Good men behave so to the most perfect strangers, aye, even to their greatest enemies, for the sake both of their reputation among men, and of the common rights of humanity;
in order that, as they have not knowingly caused inconvenience to another, no inconvenience may lawfully befall them.
He did not appear to his recognizances.
Who?
Your own relation.
If that matter appeared of the greatest importance in itself, yet its magnitude would be lessened by the consideration of your relationship.
He did not appear to his recognizances.
Who?
Your partner.
You might forgive even a greater thing than this, to a man with whom either your inclination had connected you, or fortune had associated you.
He did not appear to his recognizances.
Who?
He who was always in your company.
You therefore have hurled upon him, who allowed it to happen once that he was not in your company, all those weapons which have been forged against those who have done many things for the sake of malversation and fraud.
If your poundage was called in question,
if in any trifling matter you were afraid of some trick, would you not have at once run off to Caius Aquillius, or to some other counsel?
When the rights of friendship, of partnership, of relationship are at stake, when regard should have been had to your duty and your character, at that time you not only did not refer it to Caius Aquillius or to Lucius Lucilius, but you did not even consult yourself;
you did not even say this to yourself "The two hours are passed; Quinctius has not appeared to his recognizances; what shall I do?"
If, in truth, you had said but these four words to yourself "What shall I do?"
your covetousness and avarice would have had breathing time;
you would have given some room for reason and prudence;
you would have recollected yourself;
you would not have come to such baseness as to be forced to confess before such men that in the same hour in which he did not appear to his recognizances you took counsel how utterly to ruin the fortunes of your relation.
I now on your behalf consult these men, after the time has passed, and in an affair which is not mine, since you forgot to consult them in your own affair, and when it was the proper time.
I ask of you, Caius Aquillius, Lucius Lucilius, Publius Quintilius, and Marcus Marcellus;
A certain partner and relation of mine has not appeared to his recognizances;
a man with whom I have a long standing intimacy, but a recent dispute about money matters.
Can I demand of the praetor to be allowed to take possession of his goods?
Or must I, as he has a house, a wife, and children at Rome, not rather give notice at his house?
What is your opinion in this matter?
If, in truth, I have rightly understood your kindness and prudence, I am not much mistaken what you will answer if you are consulted.
You will say at first that I must wait;
then, if he seems to be shirking the business and to be trifling with it too long, that I must have a meeting of our friends; must ask who his agent is; must give notice at his house.
It can hardly be told how many steps there are which you would make answer ought to be taken before having recourse to this extreme and unnecessary course.
What does Naevius say to all this?
Forsooth, he laughs at our madness in expecting a consideration of the highest duty, or looking for the practices of good men in his conduct.
What have I to do, says he, with all this sanctimoniousness and punctiliousness?
Let good men, says he, look to these duties, but let them think of me thus;
let them ask not what I have, but by what means I have acquired it, and in what rank I was born, and in what manner I was brought up.
I remember, there is an old proverb about a buffoon; "that it is a much easier thing for him to become rich than to become the head of a family."
This is what he says openly by his actions, if he does not dare to say it in words.
If in truth he wishes to live according to the practices of good men, he has many things to learn and to unlearn, both which things are difficult to a man of his age.
I did not hesitate, says he, when the recognizances were forfeited, to claim the confiscation of his goods.
It was wickedly done;
but since you claim this for yourself; and demand that it be granted to you, let us grant it.
What if he has not forfeited his recognizances?
if the whole of that plea has been invented by you with the most extreme dishonesty and wickedness?
if there had actually been no securities given in any cause between you and Publius Quinctius?
What shall we call you?
Wicked?
why, even if the recognizances had been forfeited, yet in making such a demand and confiscation of his goods, you were proved to be most wicked.
Malignant?
you do not deny it.
Dishonest?
you have already claimed that as your character, and you think it a fine thing.
Audacious? covetous? perfidious?
those are vulgar and worn-out imputations, but this conduct is novel and unheard-of.
What then are we to say?
I fear forsooth lest I should either use language severer than men's nature is inclined to bear, or else more gentle than the cause requires.
You say that the recognizances were forfeited.
Quinctius the moment he returned to Rome asked you on what day the recognizances were drawn.
If he was at Rome we have nothing to say against his having entered into recognizances with you.
What then?
how can this be found out?
Lucius Albius went with him, a man of the highest honour;
he shall give his evidence.
Some friends accompanied both Albius and Quinctius;
they also shall give their evidence.
Shall the letters of Publius Quinctius, shall so many witnesses, all having the most undeniable reason for being able to know the truth, and no reason for speaking falsely, be compared with your witness to the recognizance?
And shall Publius Quinctius be harassed in a cause like this?
and shall he any longer be subjected to the misery of such fear and danger?
and shall the influence of an adversary alarm him more than the integrity of the judge comforts him?
For he always lived in an unpolished and uncompanionable manner;
he was of a melancholy and unsociable disposition;
he has not frequented the Forum, or the Campus, or banquets.
He so lived as to retain his friends by attention, and his property by economy;
he loved the ancient system of duty, all the splendour of which has grown obsolete according to present fashions.
But if, in a cause where the merits were equal, he seemed to come off the worse, that would be in no small degree to be complained of;
but now, when he is in the right, he does not even demand to come off best;
he submits to be worsted, only with these limitations, that he is not to be given up with his goods, his character, and all his fortunes, to the covetousness and cruelty of Sextus Naevius.
I have proved what I first promised to prove, O Caius Aquillius, that there was absolutely no cause why he should make this demand;
that neither was any money owed, and that if it were owed ever so much, nothing had been done to excuse recourse being had to such measures as these.
Remark now, that the goods of Publius Quinctius could not possibly have been taken possession of in accordance with the praetor's edict.
Recite the edict.
He who for the sake of fraud has lain hid.
That is not Quinctius, unless they be hid who depart on their own business, leaving an agent behind them.
The man who has no heir.
Even that is not he.
The man who leaves the country in exile.
At what time, O Naevius, do you think Quinctius ought to have been defended in his absence, or how?
Then, when you were demanding leave to take possession of his goods?
No one was present,
for no one could guess that you were going to make such a demand;
nor did it concern any one to object to that which the praetor ordered not to be done absolutely, but to be done according to his edict.
What was the first opportunity, then, which was given to the agent of defending this absent man?
When you were putting up the placards.
Then Sextus Alphenus was present:
he did not permit it;
That which was the first step of duty was observed by the agent with the greatest diligence.
Let us see what followed on this.
You arrest the servant of Publius Quinctius in public:
you attempt to take him away.
Alphenus does not permit it;
he takes him from you by force;
he takes care that he is led home to Quinctius.
Here too is seen in a high degree the attention of an illustrious agent.
You say that Quinctius is in your debt;
his agent denies it.
You wish security to he given;
he promises it.
You call him into court;
he follows you.
You demand a trial;
he does not object.
What other could be the conduct of one defending a man in his absence I do not understand.
But who was the agent?
I suppose it was some insignificant man, poor, litigious, worthless, who might be able to endure the daily abuse of a wealthy buffoon.
Nothing of the sort:
he was a wealthy Roman knight; a man managing his own affairs well:
he was, in short, the man whom Naevius himself as often as he went into Gaul, left as his agent at Rome.
And do you dare, O Sextus Naevius, to deny that Quinctius was defended in his absence,
when the same man defended him who used to defend you?
and when he accepted the trial on behalf of Quinctius, to whom when departing you used to recommend and entrust your own property and character?
Do you attempt to say that there was no one who defended Quinctius at the trial?
"I demanded," says he, "that security should be given."
You demanded it unjustly.
The order was made.
Alphenus objected.
He did, but the praetor made the decree.
Therefore the tribunes were appealed to.
Here, said he, "I have you: that is not allowing a trial, nor defending a man at a trial, when you ask assistance from the tribunes."
When I consider how prudent Hortensius is, I do not think that he will say this;
but when I hear that he has said so before, and when I consider the cause itself I do not see what else he can say;
for he admits that Alphenus tore down the bills, undertook to give security, did not object to go to trial in the very terms which Naevius proposed;
but on this condition, that according to custom and prescription, it should be before that magistrate who was appointed in order to give assistance.
You must either say that these things are not so; or that Caius Aquillius, being such a man as he is, on his oath, is to establish this law in the state: that he whose agent does not object to every trial which any one demands against him, whose agent dares to appeal from the praetor to the tribunes, is not defended at all, and may rightly have his goods taken possession of; may properly, while miserable, absent, and ignorant of it, have all the embellishments of his fortunes, all the ornaments of his life, taken from him with the greatest disgrace and ignominy.
This certainly must be proved to the satisfaction of every one, that Quinctius while absent was defended at the trial.
And as that is the ease, his goods were not taken possession of in accordance with the edict.
But then, the tribunes of the people did not even hear his cause.
I admit, if that be the case, that the agent ought to have obeyed the decree of the praetor.
What;
if Marcus Brutus openly said that he would intercede unless some agreement was come to between Alphenus himself and Naevius;
does not the appeal to the tribunes seem to have been interposed not for the sake of delay but of assistance?
What is done next?
Alphenus, in order that all men might see that Quinctius was defended at the trial, that no suspicion might exist unfavourable either to his own duty, or to his principal's character, summons many excellent men,
And, in the hearing of that fellow, he calls them to witness that he begs this of him, in the first place, out of regard to their common intimacy, that he would not attempt to take any severe steps against Quinctius in his absence without cause;
but if lie persevered in carrying on the contest in a most spiteful and hostile manner, that he is prepared by every upright and honourable method to defend him, and to prove that what he demanded was not owed, and that he accepted the trial which he proposed.
Many excellent men signed the document setting forth this fact and these conditions.
While all matters are still unaltered, while the goods are neither advertised nor taken possession of,
Alphenus promises Naevius that Quinctius should appear to his recognizances.
Quinctius does appear to his recognizances.
The matter lies in dispute while that fellow is spreading his calumnies for two years,
until he could find out by what means the affair might be diverted out of the common course of proceeding,
and the whole cause he confined to this single point to which it is now limited.
What duty of an agent can possibly be mentioned, O Caius Aquillius, which seems to have been overlooked by Alphenus?
What reason is alleged why it should be denied that Publius Quinctius was defended in his absence?
Is it that which I suppose Hortensius will allege, because he has lately mentioned it, and because Naevius is always harping on it, that Naevius was not contending on equal terms with Alphenus, at such a time, and with such magistrates?
And if I were willing to admit that, they will, I suppose, grant this, that it is not the case that no one was the agent of Publius Quinctius, but that he had one who was popular.
But it is quite sufficient for me to prove that there was an agent, with whom he could have tried the matter.
What sort of man he was, as long as he defended the man in his absence, according to law and before the proper magistrate, I think has nothing to do with the matter.
"For he was," says he, "a man of the opposite party."
No doubt; a man who had been brought up in your house, whom you from a youth had so trained up as not to favour any one of eminence, not even a gladiator.
If Alphenus had the same wish as you always especially entertained, was not the contest between you on equal terms in that matter?
Oh, says he, "he was an intimate friend of Brutus, and therefore he interposed."
You on the other hand were an intimate friend of Burrienus, who gave an unjust decision;
and, in short, of all those men who at that time were both very powerful with violence and wickedness, and who dared do all that they could.
Did you wish to overcome those men, who now are labouring with such zeal that you may be victorious?
Dare to say that, not openly, but to these very men whom you have brought with you.
Although I am unwilling to bring that matter up again by mentioning it, every recollection of which I think ought to be entirely effaced and destroyed.
This one thing I say,
if Alphenus was an influential man because of his party zeal, Naevius was most influential;
if Alphenus, relying on his personal interest, made any rather unjust demand;
Naevius demanded, and obtained too, things much more unjust.
Nor was there, as I think, any difference between your zeal.
In ability, in experience, in cunning, you easily surpassed him.
To say nothing of other things, this is sufficient:
Alphenus was ruined with those men, and for the sake of those men to whom he was attached;
you, after those men who were your friends could not get the better, took care that those who did get the better should be your friends.
But if you think you had not then the same justice as Alphenus, because it was in his power to appeal to some one against you;
because a magistrate was found before whom the cause of Alphenus could be fairly heard;
what is Quinctius to determine on at this time
I a man who has not as yet found any just magistrate, nor been able to procure the customary trial;
in whose case no condition, no security, no petition has been interposed, I do not say a just one, but none at all that had ever been heard of before that time.
I wish to try an action about money.
You cannot.
But that is the point in dispute.
It does not concern me;
you must plead to a capital charges.
Accuse me then, if it must be so.
No says be, not unless you, in an unprecedented manner, first make your defence.
You must plead;
the time must be fixed at our pleasure; the judge himself shall be removed.
What then?
Shall you be able to find any advocate, a man of such ancient principles of duty as to despise our splendour and influence?
Lucius Philippus will be my advocate; in eloquence, in dignity, and in honour, the most flourishing man in the states.
Hortensius will speak for me; a man eminent for his genius, and nobility, and reputation;
and other most noble and powerful men will accompany me into court, the number and appearance of whom may alarm not only Publius Quinctius, who is defending himself on a capital charge, but even any one who is out of danger.
This really is what an unequal contest is;
not that one in which you were skirmishing against Alphenus.
You did not leave him any place where he could make a stand against you.
You must therefore either prove that Alphenus denied he was his agent, did not tear down the bills, and refused to go to trial;
or, if all this was done, you must admit that you did not take possession of the goods of Publius Quinctius in accordance with the edict.
If, indeed, you did take possession of the things according to the edict, I ask you why they were not sold why the others who were his securities and creditors did not meet together?
Was there no one to whom Quinctius owed money?
There were some, there were many such;
because Caius, his brother, had left some amount of debt behind him.
What then was the reason?
They were all men entirely strangers to him, and he owed them money, and yet not one was found so notoriously infamous as to dare to attack the character of Publius Quinctius in his absences.
There was one man, his relation, his partner, his intimate friend, Sextus Naevius, who, though he himself was in reality in debt to him, as if some extraordinary prize of wickedness was proposed to him, strove with the greatest eagerness to deprive his own relation, oppressed and ruined by his means, not only of property which he had honestly acquired, but even of that light which is common to all men.
Where were the rest of the creditors?
Even now at this very time where are they?
Who is there who says he kept out of the way for the sake of fraud?
Who is there who denies that Quinctius was defended in his absence?
Not one is found
But, on the other hand, all men who either have or have had any transactions with him are present on his behalf and are defending him;
they are labouring that his good faith, known in many places, may not now be disparaged by the perfidy of Sextus Naevius.
In a trial of this nature Naevius ought to have brought some witnesses out of that body, who could say; "He forfeited his recognizances in my case; he cheated me, he begged a day of me for the payment of a debt which he had denied; could not get him to trial; he kept out of the way; he left no agent:"
none of all these things is said.
Witnesses are being got ready to say it
But we shall examine into that, I suppose, when they have said it:
but let them consider this one thing, that they are of weight only so far, that they can preserve that weight, if they also preserve the truth;
if they neglect that, they are so insignificant that all men may see that influence is of avail not to support a lie, but only to prove the truth.
I ask these two questions.
First of all, on what account Naevius did not complete the business he had undertaken;
that is, why he did not sell the goods which he had taken possession of in accordance with the edict:
Secondly, why out of so many other creditors no one reinforced his demand;
so that you must of necessity confess that neither was any one of them so rash, and that you yourself were unable to persevere in and accomplish that which you had most infamously begun.
What if you yourself, O Sextus Naevius, decided that the goods of Publius Quinctius had not been taken possession of according to the edict?
I conceive that your evidence, which in a matter which did not concern yourself would be very worthless, ought to be of the greatest weight in an affair of your own when it makes against you.
You bought the goods of Sextus Alphenus when Lucius Sulla, the dictator, sold them.
You entered Quinctius in your books as the partner in the purchase of these goods.
I say no more.
Did you enter into a voluntary partnership with that man who had cheated in a partnership to which he had succeeded by inheritance;
and did you by your own sentence approve of the man who you thought was stripped of his character and of all his fortunes?
I had fears indeed, O Caius Aquillius, that I could not stand my ground in this cause with a mind sufficiently fortified and resolute.
I thought thus, that, as Hortensius was going to speak against me, and as Philip was going to listen to me carefully, I should through fear stumble in many particulars.
I said to Quintus Roscius here, whose sister is the wife of Publius Quinctius, when he asked of me, and, with the greatest earnestness, entreated me to defend his relation, that it was very difficult for me, not only to sum up a cause against such orators, but even to attempt to speak at all.
When he pressed it more eagerly, I said to the man very familiarly, as our friendship justified, that a man appeared to me to have a very brazen face, who, while he was present, could attempt to use action in speaking, but those who contended with him himself, even though before that they seemed to have any skill or elegance, lost it, and that I was afraid lest something of the same sort would happen to me when I was going to speak against so great an artist.
Then Roscius said many other things with a view to encourage me, and in truth, if he were to say nothing he would still move any one by the very silent affection and zeal which he felt for his relation.
In truth, as he is an artist of that sort that he alone seems worthy of being looked at when he is on the stage, so he is also a man of such a sort that he alone seems to deserve never to go thither.
But what, says he, "if you have such a cause as this, that you have only to make this plain, that there is no one in two or three days at most can walk seven hundred miles?
Will you still fear that you will not be able to argue this point against Hortensius?"
"No," said I. "But what is that to the purpose?"
In truth, said he, "that is what the cause turns upon."
How so?
He then explains to me an affair of that sort,
and at the same time an action of Sextus Naevius, which, if that alone were alleged, ought to be sufficient.
And I beg of you, O Caius Aquillius, and of you the assessors, that you will attend to it carefully.
You will see, in truth, that on the one side there were engaged from the very beginning covetousness and audacity, that on the other side truth and modesty resisted as long as they could.
You demand to be allowed to take possession of his goods according to the edict.
On what day I wish to hear you yourself, O Naevius.
I want this unheard-of action to be proved by the voice of the very man who has committed it.
Mention the day, Naevius.
Right, how far is it from hence to your estate in Gaul?
I ask you, Naevius.
Quinctius is driven off the estate. On what day?
May we hear this also from you?
Why are you silent?
Tell me the day, I say.
He is ashamed to speak it.
I understand;
but he is ashamed too late, and to no purpose.
He is driven off the estate, O Caius Aquillius.
O incredible thing!
O inconsiderate covetousness!
O winged messenger!
The agents and satellites of Sextus Naevius come from Rome, across the Alps, among the Segusiani in two days.
O happy man who has such messengers, or rather Pegasi.
Here I, even if all the Crassi were to stand forth with all the Antonies,
if you, O Lucius Philippus, who flourished among those men, choose to plead this cause, with Hortensius for your colleague, yet I must get the best of it.
For everything does not depend, as you two think it does, on eloquence.
There is still some truth so manifest that nothing can weaken it.
Did you, before you made the demand to be allowed to take possession of his goods, send any one to take care that the master should be driven by force off the estate by his own slaves?
Choose whichever you like;
the one is incredible; the other abominable; and both are unheard-of before this time.
Tell me.
Do you deny it?
Then you sent some one beforehand.
I had rather you did.
For if you were to say that, you would be seen to tell an impudent lie:
when you confess this, you admit that you did a thing which you cannot conceal even by a lies.
Will such a design, so covetous, so audacious, so precipitate, be approved of by Aquillius and by such men as he is?
What does this madness, what does this baste, what does this precipitation intimate?
Does it not prove violence? does it not prove wickedness? does it not prove robbery? does it not, in short, prove everything rather than right, than duty, or than modesty?
You send some one without the command of the praetor.
With what intention?
You knew he would order it.
What then?
When he had ordered it, could you not have sent then?
You were about to ask him.
When?
Yes, if nothing hindered you; if the same intention existed; if you were well; in short, if you were alive.
The praetor would have made the order, I suppose, if he chose, if he was well, if he was in court, if no one objected, by giving security according to his decree, and by being willing to stand a trial.
For, by the immortal gods,
if Alphenus, the agent of Publius Quinctius, were then willing to give security and to stand a trial, and in short to do everything which you chose, what would you do?
Would you recall him whom you had sent into Gaul?
But this man would have been already expelled from his farm, already driven headlong from his home, already (the most unworthy thing of all) assaulted by the hands of his own slaves, in obedience to your messenger and command.
You would, forsooth, make amends for these things afterwards.
Do you dare to speak of the life of any man, you who must admit this, that you were so blinded by covetousness and avarice, that, though you did not know what would happen afterwards, but many things might happen, you placed your hope from a present crime in the uncertain event of the future?
And I say this, just as if, at that very time when the praetor had ordered you to take possession according to his edict, you had sent any one to take possession, you either ought to, or could have ejected Publius Quinctius from possession.
Everything, O Caius Aquillius, is of such a nature that any one may be able to perceive that in this cause dishonesty and interest are contending with poverty and truth.
How did the praetor order you to take possession?
I suppose, in accordance with his edict.
In what words was the recognizance drawn up?
If the goods of Publius Quinctius have been taken possession of in accordance with the praetor's edict.
Let us return to the edict.
How does that enjoin you to take possession?
Is there any pretence, O Caius Aquillius, if he took possession in quite a different way from that which the praetor enjoined, for denying that then he did not take possession according to the edict, but that I have beaten him in the trial?
None, I imagine.
Let us refer to the edict.
"They who in accordance with my edict have come into possession."
He is speaking of you, Naevius, as you think;
for you say that you came into possession according to the edict.
He defines for you what you are to do; he instructs you; he gives you precepts.
It seems that those ought to be in possession.
How?
That which they can rightly secure in the place where they now are, let them secure there; that which they cannot, they may carry or lead away.
What then?
It is not right, says he, "to drive away the owner against his will."
The very man who with the object of cheating is keeping out of the way, the very man who deals dishonestly with all his creditors, he forbids to be driven off his farm against his will.
As you are on your way to take possession, O Sextus Naevius, the praetor himself openly says to you "Take possession in such manner that Naevius may have possession at the same time with you; take possession in such a manner that no violence may be offered to Quinctius."
What?
how do you observe that?
I say nothing of his not having been a man who was keeping out of the way, of his being a man who had a house, a wife, children, and an agent at Rome;
I say nothing of all this:
I say this, that the owner was expelled from his farm; that hands were laid on their master by his own slaves, before his own household gods;
I say too that Naevius never even asked Quinctius for the money, when he was with him, and might have sued him every day;
because he preferred that all the most perplexing modes of legal proceedings should take place, to his own great discredit, and to the greatest danger of Publius Quinctius, rather than allow of the simple trial about money matters which could have been got through in one day;
from which one trial he admits that all these arose and proceeded.
On which occasion I offered a condition, if he was determined to demand the money, that Publius Quinctius should give security to submit to the decision, if he also, if Quinctius had any demands upon him, would submit to the like conditions.
I showed how many things ought to be done before a demand was made that the goods of a relation should be taken possession of;
especially when he had at Rome his house, his wife, his children, and an agent who was equally an intimate friend of both.
I proved that when he said the recognizances were forfeited, there were actually no recognizances at all; that on the day on which he says he gave him the promise, he was not even at Rome.
I promised that I would make that plain by witnesses, who both must know the truth, and who had no reason for speaking falsely.
I proved also that it was not possible that the goods should have been taken possession of according to the edict;
because he was neither said to have kept out of the way for the purpose of fraud, nor to have left the country in banishment.
The charge remains, that no one defended him at the trial.
In opposition to which I argued that he was most abundantly defended, and that not by a man unconnected with him, nor by any slanderous or worthless person, but by a Roman knight, his own relation and intimate friend, whom Sextus Naevius himself had been accustomed previously to leave as his own agent.
And that even if he did appeal to the tribunes, he was not on that account the less prepared to submit to a trial; and that Naevius had not had his rights wrested from him by the powerful interest of the agent; that on the other hand he was so much superior to us in interest that he now scarcely gives us the liberty of breathing.
I asked what the reason was why the goods had not been sold, since they had been taken possession of according to the edict.
Secondly, I asked this also, on what account not one of so many creditors either did the same thing then, why not one speaks against him now, but why they are all striving for Publius Quinctius?
Especially when in such a trial the testimonies of creditors are thought exceedingly material.
After that, I employed the testimony of the adversary, who lately entered as his partner the man who, according to the language of his present claim, he demonstrates was at that time not even in the number of living men.
Then I mentioned that incredible rapidity, or rather audacity of his.
I showed that it was inevitable, either that seven hundred miles had been run over in two days, or that Sextus Naevius had sent men to take possession many days before he demanded leave so to seize his goods.
After that I recited the edict, which expressly forbade the owner to be driven off his by which it was plain that Naevius had not taken possession according to the edict, as he confessed that Quinctius had been driven off his farm by force.
But I thoroughly proved that the goods had actually not been taken possession of, because such a seizure of goods is looked at not as to part but with respect to everything which can be seized or taken possession of.
I said that he had a house at Rome which that fellow never even made an attempt on; that he had many slaves, of which he neither took possession of any, and did not even touch any; that there was one whom he attempted to touch; that he was forbidden to, and that he remained quiet.
You know also that Sextus Naevius never came on to the private farms of Quinctius even in Gaul.
Lastly I proved that the private servants of Quinctius were not all driven away from that very estate which he took possession of, having expelled his partner by force.
From which, and from all the other sayings, and actions, and thoughts of Sextus Naevius, any one can understand that that fellow did nothing else, and is now doing nothing, but endeavouring by violence, by injustice, and by unfair means at this trial, to make the whole farm his own which belongs to both partners in common.
Now that I have summed up the whole cause the affair itself and the magnitude of the danger, O Caius Aquillius, seem to make it necessary for Publius Quinctius to solicit and entreat you and your colleagues, by his old age and his desolate condition, merely to follow the dictates or your own nature and goodness;
so that as the truth is on his side, his necessitous state may move you to pity rather than the influence of the other party to cruelty.
From the self same day when we came before you as judges, we began to disregard all the threats of those men which before we were alarmed at.
If cause was to contend with cause we are sure that we could easily prove ours to any one
but as the course of life of the one was to be contested with the course of life of the other, we thought we had on that account even more need of you as our judge.
For this is the very point now in question, whether the rustic and unpolished economy of my client can defend itself against the luxury and licentiousness of the other or whether, homely as it is, and stripped of all ornaments, it is to lie handed over naked to covetousness and wantonness.
Publius Naevius does not compare himself with you, O Sextus Naevius, he does not vie with you in riches or power.
He gives up to you all the arts by which you are great;
he confesses that he does not speak elegantly; that he is not able to say pleasant things to people; that he does not abandon a friendship when his friend is in distress, and fly off to another which is in flourishing circumstances; that he does not give magnificent and splendid banquets; that he has not a house closed against modesty and holiness, but open and as it were exposed to cupidity and debauchery;
on the other hand he says that duty, good faith, industry and a life which has been always austere and void of pleasure has been his choice;
he knows that the opposite course is more fashionable, and that by such habits people have more influence.
What then shall be done?
They have not so much more influence, that those who, having abandoned the strict discipline of virtuous men, have chosen rather to follow the gains and extravagance of Gallonius, and have even spent their liven in audacity and perfidy which were no part of his character, should have absolute dominion over the lives and fortunes of honourable men.
If he may be allowed to live where Sextus Naevius does not wish to, if there is room in the city for an honest man against the will of Naevius;
if Publius Quinctius may be allowed to breathe in opposition to the nod and sovereign power of Naevius;
if under your protection, he can preserve in opposition to the insolence of his enemy the ornaments which he has acquired by virtue, there is hope that this unfortunate and wretched man may at last be able to rest in peace.
But if Naevius is to have power to do everything he chooses, and if he chooses what is unlawful, what is to be done?
What God is to be appealed to?
The faith of what man can we invoke?
What complaints, what lamentations can be devised adequate to so great a calamity.
It is a miserable thing to be despoiled of all one's fortunes; it is more miserable still to be so unjustly.
It is a bitter thing to be circumvented by any one, more bitter still to be so by a relation.
It is a calamitous thing to be stripped of one's goods, more calamitous still if accompanied by disgrace.
It is an intolerable injury to be slain by a brave and honourable man, more intolerable still to be slain by one whose voice has been prostituted to the trade of a crier.
It is an unworthy thing to be conquered by one's equal or one's superior, more unworthy still by one's inferior, by one lower than oneself.
It is a grievous thing to be handed over with one's goods to another, more grievous still to be handed over to an enemy.
It is a horrible thing to have to plead to a capital charge, more horrible still to have to speak in one's own defence before one's accuser speaks.
Quinctius has looked round on all sides, has encountered every danger.
He was not only unable to find a praetor from whom he could obtain a trial, much less one from whom he could obtain one on his own terms, but he could not even move the friends of Sextus Naevius, at whose feet he often lay, and that for a long time, entreating them by the immortal Gods either to contest the point with him according to law, or at least, if they must do him injustice, to do it without ignominy.
Last of all he approached the haughty countenance of his very enemy;
weeping he took the hand of Sextus Naevius, well practised in advertising the goods of his relations.
He entreated him by the ashes of his dead brother by the name of their relationship, by his own wife and children to whom no one is a nearer relation than Publius Quinctius, at length to take pity on him, to have some regard, if not for their relationship, at least for his age, if not for a man, at least for humanity, to terminate the matter on any conditions as long as they were only endurable, leaving his character unimpeached.
Being rejected by him, getting no assistance from his friends being passed and frightened by every magistrate he has no one but you whom he can appeal
to you he commends himself to you he commends all his property and fortunes
to you he commends his character and his hopes for the remainder of his life.
Harassed by much contumely suffered in under many injuries he flies to you not unworthy but unfortunate;
driven out of a beautiful farm with his enemies attempting to fix every possible mark of ignominy on him, seeing his adversary the owner of his paternal property, while he himself is unable to make up a dowry for his marriageable daughter, he has still done nothing inconsistent with his former life.
Therefore be begs this of you, O Caius Aquillius, that he may be allowed to carry with him out of this place the character and the probity which, now that his life is nearly come to an end, he brought with him before your tribunal, that he, of whose virtue no one ever doubted, may not be branded with disgrace, with stigma, and with the most shameful ignominy; that Sextus Naevius may not array himself in all his ornaments as spoils of victory; that it may not be owing to you that the character, which has accompanied Publius Quinctius to his old age, does not attend him to the tomb.
He, forsooth, excellent man, and of singular integrity, endeavours in his own cause to bring forward his account-books as witnesses.
Did I endeavour to corrupt such a man as that, so as to induce him to make a false entrance for my sake?
I am waiting till Chaerea uses this argument.
Was I able to induce this hand to be full of falsehood, and these fingers to make a false entry?
But if he produces his accounts, Roscius will also produce his.
These words will appear in the books of the one, but not in those of the other.
Why should you trust one rather than the other?
Oh, would he ever have written it if he had not borne this expense by his authority?
No, says the other, would he not have written it if he had given the authority?
For just as it is discreditable to put down what is not owed, so it is dishonest not to put down what you do owe.
For his accounts are just as much condemned who omits to make an entry of the truth, as his who puts down what is false.
But see now to what, relying on the abundance and cogency of my arguments, I am now coming.
If Caius Fannius produces in his own behalf his accounts of money received and paid, written at his own pleasure, I do not object to your giving your decision in his favour.
What brother would show so much indulgence to a brother, what father to a son, as to consider whatever he entered in this manner proof of a fact?
Oh, Roscius will ratify it.
Produce your books; what you were convinced of, he will be convinced of;
what was approved of by you, will be approved of by him.
A little while ago we demanded the accounts of Marcus Perperna, and of Publius Saturius.
Now, O Caius Fannius Chaerea, we demand your accounts alone, and we do not object to the action being decided by them
Why then do you not produce them?
Does he not keep accounts?
Indeed he does most carefully.
Does he not enter small matters in his books?
Indeed be does everything.
Is this a small and trifling sum?
How is it that such an extraordinary sum us omitted?
Oh, ye immortal gods
that there should be any one endued with such audacity, as to dare to demand a sum which he is afraid to enter in his account-books; not to hesitate to swear before the court to what, when not on his oath, he scrupled to put on paper; to endeavour to persuade another of what he is unable to make out to his own satisfaction.
He says that I am indignant, and sent the accounts too soon;
he confesses that he has not this sum entered in his book of money received and expended;
but he asserts that it does occur in his memoranda.
Are you then so fond of yourself, have you such a magnificent opinion of yourself, as to ask for money from us on the strength, not of your account-books, but of your memoranda?
To read one's account-books instead of producing witnesses, is a piece of arrogance;
but is it not insanity to produce mere notes of writings and scraps of paper?
If memoranda have the same force and authority, and are arranged with the same care as accounts, where is the need of making an account-book? of making out careful lists? of keeping a regular order? of making a permanent record of old writings?
But if we have adopted the custom of making account-books, because we put no trust in flying memoranda, shall that which, by all individuals, is considered unimportant and not to be relied on, be considered important and holy before a judge?
Why is it that we write down memoranda carelessly, that we make up account-books carefully?
For what reason?
Because the one is to last a month, the other for ever;
these are immediately expunged
those are religiously preserved;
these embrace the recollection of a short time,
those pledge the good faith and honesty of a man for ever;
these are thrown away,
those are arranged in order.
Therefore, no one ever produced memoranda at a trial;
men do produce accounts, and read entries in books.
You, O Caius Piso, a man of the greatest good faith, and virtue, and dignity, and authority, would not venture to demand money on the strength of memoranda.
I need not say any more about matters in which the custom is so notorious;
but I ask you this, which is very material to the question,
How long ago is it, O Fannius, that you made this entry in your memoranda?
He blushes;
he does not know what to answer;
he is at a loss for anything to invent off-hand.
It is two months ago, you will say;
yet it ought to have been copied into the account-book of money received and paid.
It is more than six months.
Why then is it left so long in the memorandum-book?
What if it is more than three years ago?
How is it that, when every one else who makes up account-books transfers his accounts every month almost into his books you allow this sum to remain among your memoranda more than three years?
Have you all other sums of money received and expended regularly entered, or not?
If not, how is it that you make up your books?
If you have, how is it that, when you were entering all other items in regular order, you leave this sum, which was one of the greatest of all in amount, for more than three years in your memoranda?
You did not like it to be known that Roscius was in your debt.
Why did you put it down at all?
"You were asked not to enter it."
Why did you put it down in your memoranda?
But, although I think this is strong enough, yet I cannot satisfy myself unless I get evidence from Caius Fannius himself that this money is not owed to him.
It is a great thing which I am attempting; it is a difficult thing which I am undertaking;
yet I will agree that Roscius shall not gain the verdict unless he has the same man both for his adversary and for his witness.
A definite sum of money was owed to you, which is now sought to be recovered at law;
and security for a legitimate portion of it has been given.
In this case, if you have demanded one sesterce more than is owed to you, you have lost your cause;
because trial before a judge is one thing, arbitration is another.
Trial before a judge is about a definite sum of money; arbitration about one which is not determined.
We come before a judge so as either to gain the whole suit or to lose it;
we go before an arbiter on the understanding that we may not get all we asked, and on the other hand may not get nothing.
Of that the very words of the formula are a proof.
What is the formula in a trial before a judge?
Direct severe, and simple;
What is the formula in a cause brought before an arbiter?
That whatever is just and right shall be given.
But that man confesses that he is asking more than is owed to him, but that he will be satisfied and more than satisfied with what is given him by the arbiter.
Therefore the one has confidence in his case, the other distrusts his.
Who was the arbitrator in this matter?
I wish he were at Rome.
He is at Rome.
I wish he were in court.
He is.
I wish he were sitting as assessor to Caius Piso.
He is Caius Piso himself.
Did you take the same man for both arbitrator, and judge?
Did you permit to the same man unlimited liberty of varying his decision, and also limit him to the strictest formula of the bond?
Who ever went before an arbitrator and got all that he demanded?
No one; for he only got all that it was just should be given him.
You have come before a judge for the very same sum for which you had recourse to an arbiter.
Other men, when they see that their cause is failing before a judge, fly to an arbitrator.
This man has dared to come from an arbiter to a judge,
who when he admitted an arbitrator about this money, and about the credit due to his account-books, gave a plain indication that no money was owing to him.
Already two-thirds of the cause are over.
He admits that he has not set down the sum as due,
and he does not venture to say that he has entered it as paid, since he does not produce his books.
The only alternative remaining, is for him to assert that he had received a promise of it;
for otherwise I do not see how he can possibly demand a definite sum of money.
Did you receive a promise of it?
When?
On what day?
At what time?
In whose presence?
Who says that I made such a promise?
No one.
If I were to make an end of speaking here, I appear to have said enough to acquit myself as far as my good faith and diligence are at stake to have said enough for the cause and dispute, enough for the formula and bond;
I seem to have said enough to satisfy the judge why judgment ought to pass for Roscius.
A definite sum of money has been demanded;
security is given for a third part of it;
this money must either have been given, or set down as paid, or promised.
Fannius admits it was not given;
the books of Fannius prove that it has not been set down as paid;
the silence of witnesses proves that it was never promised.
What do we want more?
Because the defendant is a man to whom money has always seemed of no value, but character of the very highest, and the judge is a man whom we are no less anxious to have think well of us than to decide favourably for us, and the bar present is such, that on account of its extraordinary brilliancy we ought to feel almost as much respect for it as for another judge, we will speak as if every regular trial, every honorary arbitration, every domestic duty were included and comprehended in the present formula.
That former oration was necessary, this shall be a voluntary one;
the other was addressed to the judge, this is addressed to Caius Piso;
that was on behalf of a defendant, this is on behalf of Roscius;
the one was prepared to gain a victory, this one to preserve a good character.
You demand, O Fannius, a sum of money from Roscius.
What sum?
Is it money which is owed to you from the partnership?
or money which has been promised and assured to you by his liberality?
One demand is important and odious, the other is more trifling and easy to be got rid of.
Is it a sum which is owing from the partnership?
What are you saying?
This is neither to be borne lightly nor to be defended carelessly.
For if there are any private actions of the greatest, I may almost say, of capital importance, they are these three the actions about trust, about guardianship, and about partnership.
For it is equally perfidious and wicked to break faith, which is the bond of life, and to defraud one's ward who has come under one's guardianship, and to deceive a partner who has connected himself with on in business.
And as this is the case, let us consider who it is who in this instance has deceived and cheated his partner.
For his past life shall silently give us a trustworthy and important testimony one way or other.
Is it Quintus Roscius?
What do you say?
Does not, as fire dropped upon water is immediately extinguished and cooled, so, does not, I say, a false accusation, when brought in contact with a most pure and holy life, instantly fall and become extinguished?
Has Roscius cheated his partner?
Can this guilt belong to this man?
who, in truth, (I say it boldly,) has more honesty than skill, more truth than learning;
whom the Roman people think even a better man than he is an actor;
who is as worthy of the stage because of his skill, as he is wholly of the senate on account of his moderation.
But why am I so foolish as to say anything about Roscius to Piso?
I suppose I am recommending an unknown man in many words.
Is there any man in the whole world of whom you have a better opinion?
Is there any man who appears to you more pure, more modest, more humane, more regardful of his duty, more liberal?
Have even you, O Saturius, who appear against him, have you a different opinion?
Is it not true that as often as you have mentioned his name in the cause,
you have said that he was a good man, and have spoken of him with expressions of respect?
which no one is in the habit of doing except in the case of either a most honorable man, or of a most dear friend.
While doing so, in truth, you appeared to me ridiculously inconstant in both injuring and praising the same man;
in calling him at the same time a most excellent man and a most dishonest man.
You were speaking of the man with respect, and calling him a most exemplary man, and at the same time you were accusing him of having cheated his partner.
But I imagine the truth is, your praise was prompted by truth; the accusation by your duty to your client.
You were speaking of Roscius as you really thought;
you were conducting the cause according to the will of Chaerea.
Roscius cheated him.
This, in truth, seems absurd to the ears and minds of men.
What?
If he had got hold of some man, rich, timid, foolish and indolent, who was unable to go to law with him,
still it would Be incredible.
But let us see whom he has cheated.
Roscius has cheated Caius Fannius Chaerea.
I beg and entreat you, who know them both, compare the lives of the two men together;
you who do not know them, compare the countenance of both.
Does not his very head, and those eye-brows entirely shaved off, seem to smell of wickedness, and to proclaim cunning?
Does he not from his toe-nails to his head, if the voiceless figure of a man's person can enable men to conjecture his character, seem wholly made up of fraud, and cheating, and lies?
He who has his head and eyebrows always shaved that he may not be said to have one hair of an honest man about him.
And Roscius has been accustomed to represent his figure admirably on the stage, and yet he does no meet with the gratitude due to such kindness.
For when he acts Ballio, that most worthless and perjured pimp, he represents Chaerea.
That foul, and impure, and detestable character is represented in this man's manners, and nature, and life.
And why he should have thought Roscius like himself in dishonesty and wickedness, I do not know;
unless, perhaps, because he observed that he imitated himself admirably in the character of the pimp.
Wherefore consider over and over again, O Caius Piso, who is said to have cheated, and who to have been cheated.
Roscius is said to have cheated Fannius?
What is that?
The honest man is said to have cheated the rogue; the modest man, the shameless one; the chaste man, the perjurer; the unpractised man, the cunning one; the liberal man is said to have cheated the covetous one.
It is incredible how, if Fannius were said to have cheated Roscius, each fact would appear probable from the character of each man; both that Fannius had acted wickedly, and that Roscius had been cheated by his imprudence.
So when Roscius is accused of having cheated Fannius, both parts of the story are incredible, both that Roscius should have sought anything covetously, and that Fannius should have lost anything by his good-nature.
Such is the beginning.
Let us see what follows.
On what account?
Saturius smiles; a cunning fellow, as he seems to himself.
I see;
For certainly, O Marcus Perperna and Caius Piso, they would not have been of such consequence to either of you, as to make you cheat your partner.
I ask, then, why they were of such consequence to Roscius!
Was he in want of money?
No, he was even a rich man.
Was he in debt?
On the contrary, he was living within his income.
Was he avaricious?
far from it; even before he was a rich man he was always most liberal and munificent.
Oh, in the name of good faith, of gods, and men!
And that sum was immense, this trifling; that was honourable, this sordid; that was pleasant, this bitter; that would have been his own, this must have been stated on an action and a trial.
He would not; he undertook the labour entitled to gain, but refused the gain of his labour.
He did not yet desist from serving the Roman people; he has long since ceased to benefit himself.
Would you even do this, O Fannius?
And if you were able to receive such profits, would you not act with all your gestures, and even at the risk of your life?
What now shall I say of these things which I know to a certainty occur to your minds?
Roscius cheated you in a partnership.
There are laws, there are formularies established for every case, that no one may make a blunder, either as to the legal description of injury which he has suffered, or as to the sort of action he should bring;
for public formulae have been given by the praetor to suit every evil, or vexation, or inconvenience, or calamity, or injury which any one can suffer and to them each private action is adapted.
And as this is the case, I ask why you have not Roscius as your partner before an arbitrator?
Did you not know the formula?
It was most notorious.
Were you unwilling to adopt severe proceedings?
Why so?
On account of your ancient intimacy?
Why then do you injure him now?
On account of the integrity of the man?
Why then do you accuse him now?
On account of the magnitude of the crime?
Is it so?
The man whom you could not circumvent before an arbitrator, to whose decision such a matter properly belonged, will you seek to convict before a judge, who has no power of arbitrating in it?
Either, then, bring this charge where it may be discussed, or do not bring it where it may not:
although the charge is already done away with by your own evidence;
for when you declined to adopt that formula, you showed that he had committed no fraud against the partnership.
Has he account-books, or not?
If he has not, how is the covenant shown?
If he has, why do you not tell us?
Say now, if you dare, that Roscius begged of you to appoint his own intimate friend arbitrator.
He did not beg you to.
Say that he made a covenant in order to procure his acquittal.
He made no covenant.
Ask why then he was acquitted?
Because he was a man of the most perfect innocence and integrity.
For what happened?
You came of your own accord to the house of Roscius;
you apologised to him;
you begged him to announce to the judge that you had acted hastily, and to pardon you;
you said that you would not appear against him;
you said loudly that he owed you nothing on account of the partnership.
He gave notice to the judge; he was acquitted.
And still do you dare to mention dishonesty and theft?
He persists in his impudence.
I did all this, says he, for he had made a covenant with me.
Yes, I suppose to procure his acquittal.
What reason had he to fear that he would be condemned?
