Son of Cleinias, I think it must surprise you that I, the first of all your lovers, am the only one of them who has not given up his suit and thrown you over, and whereas they have all pestered you with their conversation I have not spoken one word to you for so many years.
The cause of this has been nothing human, but a certain spiritual opposition, of whose power you shall be informed at some later time.
However, it now opposes me no longer, so I have accordingly come to you; and I am in good hopes that it will not oppose me again in the future.
Now I have been observing you all this time, and have formed a pretty good notion of your behavior to your lovers: for although they were many and high-spirited, everyone of them has found your spirit too strong for him and has run away.
Let me explain the reason of your spirit being too much for them. You say you have no need of any man in any matter; for your resources are so great, beginning with the body and ending with the soul, that you lack nothing.
You think, in the first place, that you are foremost in beauty and stature and you are not mistaken in this, as is plain for all to see and in the second place, that you are of the most gallant family in your city, the greatest city in Greece, and that there you have, through your father, very many of the best people as your friends and kinsmen, who would assist you in case of need, and other connections also, through your mother, who are not a whit inferior to these, nor fewer.
And you reckon upon a stronger power than all those that I have mentioned, in Pericles, son of Xanthippus, whom your father left as guardian of you and your brother when he died, and who is able to do whatever he likes not only in this city but all over Greece and among many great nations of the barbarians.
And I will add besides the wealth of your house: but on this, I observe, you presume least of all.
Well, you puff yourself up on all these advantages, and have overcome your lovers, while they in their inferiority have yielded to your might, and all this has not escaped you; so I am very sure that you wonder what on earth I mean by not getting rid of my passion, and what can be my hope in remaining when the rest have fled.
Perhaps also, Socrates, you are not aware that you have only just anticipated me.
For I, in fact, had the intention of coming and asking you first that very same question what is your aim and expectation in bothering me by making a particular point of always turning up wherever I may be.
For I really do wonder what can be your object, and should be very glad if you would tell me.
Then you will listen to me, presumably, with keen attention if, as you say, you long to know what I mean, and I have in you a listener who will stay to hear me out.
Why, to be sure: only speak.
Look to it, then; for it would be no wonder if I should make as much difficulty about stopping as I have made about starting.
My good sir, speak; for I will listen.
Speak I must, I suppose.
Now, although it is hard for a lover to parley with a man who does not yield to lovers, I must make bold nevertheless to put my meaning into words.
For if I saw you, Alcibiades, content with the things I set forth just now, and minded to pass your life in enjoying them, I should long ago have put away my love, so at least I persuade myself: but as it is, I shall propound to your face quite another set of your thoughts, whereby you will understand that I have had you continually before my mind.
For I believe, if some god should ask you: Alcibiades, do you prefer to live with your present possessions, or to die immediately if you are not to have the chance of acquiring greater things?
I believe you would choose to die.
But let me tell you what I imagine must be the present hope of your life.
You think that if you come shortly before the Athenian Assembly which you expect to occur in a very few days you will stand forth and prove to the people that you are more worthy of honor than either Pericles or anyone else who has ever existed, and that having proved this you will have the greatest power in the state; and that if you are the greatest here, you will be the same among all the other Greeks, and not only Greeks, but all the barbarians who inhabit the same continent with us.
And if that same god should say to you again, that you are to hold sway here in Europe, but are not to be allowed to cross over into Asia and to interfere with the affairs of that region, I believe you would be equally loth to live on those sole conditions either if you are not to fill, one may say, the whole world with your name and your power; and I fancy that, except Cyrus and Xerxes, you think there has never existed a single man who was of any account.
So then that this is your hope, I know well enough; I am not merely guessing.
And I daresay you will reply, since you know that what I say is true: Well, Socrates, and what has that to do with your point?
I am going to tell you, dear son of Cleinias and Deinomache.
Without me it is impossible for all those designs of yours to be crowned with achievement; so great is the power I conceive myself to have over your affairs and over you, and it is for this very reason, I believe, that the god has so long prevented me from talking with you, and I was waiting to see when he would allow me.
For as you have hopes of proving yourself in public to be invaluable to the state and, having proved it, of winning forthwith unlimited power, so do I hope to win supreme power over you by proving that I am invaluable to you, and that neither guardian nor kinsman nor anyone else is competent to transmit to you the power that you long for except me, with the god's help, however.
In your younger days, to be sure, before you had built such high hopes, the god, as I believe, prevented me from talking with you, in order that I might not waste my words:
but now he has set me on; for now you will listen to me.
You seem to me far more extraordinary, Socrates, now that you have begun to speak, than before, when you followed me about in silence; though even then you looked strange enough.
Well, as to my intending all this or not, you have apparently made your decision, and any denial of mine will not avail me to persuade you.
Very good: but supposing I have intended ever so much what you say, how are you the sole means through which I can hope to attain it?
Can you tell me?
Are you asking whether I can make a long speech, such as you are used to hearing?
No, my gift is not of that sort.
But I fancy I could prove to you that the case is so, if you will consent to do me just one little service.
Why, if you mean a service that is not troublesome, I consent.
Do you consider it troublesome to answer questions put to you?
No, I do not.
Then answer.
Ask.
Well, you have the intentions which I say you have, I suppose?
Be it so, if you like, in order that I may know what you will say next.
Now then: you intend, as I say, to come forward as adviser to the Athenians in no great space of time; well, suppose I were to take hold of you as you were about to ascend the platform, and were to ask you: Alcibiades, on what subject do the Athenians propose to take advice, that you should stand up to advise them? Is it something about which you have better knowledge than they?
What would be your reply?
I should say, I suppose, it was something about which I knew better than they.
Then you are a good adviser on things about which you actually know.
To be sure.
And you know only the things you have learnt from others or discovered yourself?
What could I know besides?
And can it be that you would ever have learnt or discovered anything without being willing either to learn it or to inquire into it yourself?
No.
Well then, would you have been willing to inquire into or learn what you thought you knew?
No, indeed.
So there was a time when you did not think that you knew what you now actually know.
There must have been.
Well, but I know pretty nearly the things that you have learnt: tell me if anything has escaped me.
You learnt, if I recollect, writing and harping and wrestling; as for fluting, you refused to learn it.
These are the things that you know, unless perhaps there is something you have been learning unobserved by me; and this you were not, I believe, if you so much as stepped out of doors either by night or by day.
No, I have taken no other lessons than those.
Then tell me, will it be when the Athenians are taking advice how they are to do their writing correctly that you are to stand up and advise them?
Upon my word, not I.
Well, about strokes on the lyre?
Not at all.
Nor in fact are they accustomed to deliberate on throws in wrestling either at the Assembly.
No, to be sure.
Then what will be the subject of the advice?
For I presume it will not be about building.
No, indeed.
For a builder will give better advice than you in that matter.
Yes.
Nor yet will it be about divination?
No.
For there again a diviner will serve better than you.
Yes.
Whether he be short or tall, handsome or ugly, nay, noble or ignoble.
Of course.
For on each subject the advice comes from one who knows, not one who has riches.
Of course.
And whether their mentor be poor or rich will make no difference to the Athenians when they deliberate for the health of the citizens; all that they require of their counsellor is that he be a physician.
Naturally.
Then what will they have under consideration if you are to be right in standing up, when you do so, as their counsellor?
Their own affairs, Socrates.
Do you mean with regard to shipbuilding, and the question as to what sort of ships they ought to get built?
No, I do not, Socrates.
Because, I imagine, you do not understand shipbuilding.
Is that, and that alone, the reason?
That is just the reason.
Well, on what sort of affairs of their own do you mean that they will be deliberating?
On war, Socrates, or on peace, or on any other of the state's affairs.
Do you mean that they will be deliberating with whom they ought to make peace, and on whom they ought to make war, and in what manner?
Yes.
And on whom it is better to do so, ought they not?
Yes.
And at such time as it is better?
Certainly.
And for so long as they had better?
Yes.
Now if the Athenians should deliberate with whom they should wrestle close, and with whom only at arm's length, and in what manner, would you or the wrestling-master be the better adviser?
The wrestling-master, I presume.
And can you tell me what the wrestling-master would have in view when he advised as to the persons with whom they ought or ought not to wrestle close, and when and in what manner?
What I mean is something like this: ought they not to wrestle close with those with whom it is better to do so?
Yes.
And so far as is better, too?
So far.
And at such time also as is better?
Certainly.
But again, when one sings, one has sometimes to accompany the song with harping and stepping?
Yes, one has.
And at such time as is better?
Yes.
And so far as is better?
I agree.
Well now, since you applied the term better to the two cases of harping for accompaniment of a song and close wrestling, what do you call the better in the case of harping, to correspond with what in the case of wrestling I call gymnastic? What do you call the other?
I do not understand.
Well, try to copy me:
for my answer gave you, I think, what is correct in every instance; and that is correct, I presume, which proceeds by rule of the art, is it not?
Yes.
And was not the art here gymnastic?
To be sure.
And I said that the better in the case of wrestling was gymnastic.
You did.
And I was quite fair?
I think so.
Come then, in your turn for it would befit you also, I fancy, to argue fairly tell me, first, what is the art which includes harping and singing and treading the measure correctly?
What is it called as a whole?
You cannot yet tell me?
No, indeed.
Well, try another way: who are the goddesses that foster the art?
The Muses, you mean, Socrates?
I do.
Now, just think, and say by what name the art is called after them.
Music, I suppose you mean.
Yes, I do.
And what is that which proceeds correctly by its rule?
As in the other case I was correct in mentioning to you gymnastic as that which goes by the art, so I ask you, accordingly, what you say in this case.
What manner of proceeding is required?
A musical one, I suppose.
You are right.
Come then, what is it that you term better, in respect of what is better in waging war and being at peace?
Just as in our other instances you said that the better implied the more musical and again, in the parallel case, the more gymnastical, try now if you can tell me what is the better in this case.
But I am quite unable.
But surely that is disgraceful; for if you should speak to somebody as his adviser on food, and say that one sort was better than another, at this time and in this quantity,
and he then asked you What do you mean by the better, Alcibiades? in a matter like that you could tell him you meant the more wholesome, although you do not set up to be a physician;
yet in a case where you set up to have knowledge and are ready to stand up and advise as though you knew, are you not ashamed to be unable, as appears, to answer a question upon it?
Does it not seem disgraceful?
Very.
Then consider and do your best to tell me the connection of better in being at peace or at war with those to whom we ought to be so disposed.
Well, I am considering, but I fail to perceive it.
But you must know what treatment it is that we allege against each other when we enter upon a war, and what name we give it when we do so?
I do: we say we are victims of deceit or violence or spoliation.
Enough: how do we suffer each of these things?
Try and tell me what difference there is between one way and another.
Do you mean by that, Socrates, whether it is in a just way or an unjust way?
Precisely.
Why, there you have all the difference in the world.
Well then,
on which sort are you going to advise the Athenians to make war those who are acting unjustly, or those who are doing what is just?
That is a hard question: for even if someone decides that he must go to war with those who are doing what is just, he would not admit that they were doing so.
For that would not be lawful, I suppose?
No, indeed; nor is it considered honorable either.
So you too will appeal to these things in making your speeches?
Necessarily.
Then must not that better about which I was asking in reference to making or not making war, on those on whom we ought to or not, and when we ought to or not, be simply and solely the juster?
Apparently it is.
How now, friend Alcibiades?
Have you overlooked your own ignorance of this matter, or have I overlooked your learning it and taking lessons of a master who taught you to distinguish the more just and the more unjust?
And who is he?
Inform me in my turn, in order that you may introduce me to him as another pupil.
You are joking, Socrates.
No, I swear by our common God of Friendship, whose name I would by no means take in vain. Come, if you can, tell me who the man is.
But what if I cannot?
Do you think I could not know about what is just and unjust in any other way?
Yes, you might, supposing you discovered it.
But do you not think I might discover it?
Yes, quite so, if you inquired.
And do you not think I might inquire?
I do, if you thought you did not know.
And was there not a time when I held that view?
Well spoken.
Then can you tell me at what time it was that you thought you did not know what is just and unjust?
Pray, was it a year ago that you were inquiring, and thought you did not know?
Or did you think you knew?
Please answer truly, that our debates may not be futile.
Well, I thought I knew.
And two years, and three years, and four years back, were you not of the same mind?
I was.
But, you see, before that time you were a child, were you not?
Yes.
So I know well enough that then you thought you knew.
How do you know it so well?
Many a time I heard you, when as a child you were dicing or playing some other game at your teacher's or elsewhere, instead of showing hesitation about what was just and unjust, speak in very loud and confident tones about one or other of your playmates, saying he was a rascal and a cheat who played unfairly.
Is not this a true account?
But what was I to do, Socrates, when somebody cheated me?
Yet if you were ignorant then whether you were being unfairly treated or not, how can you ask What are you to do?
Well, but on my word, I was not ignorant: no, I clearly understood that I was being wronged.
So you thought you knew, even as a child, it seems, what was just and unjust.
I did; and I knew too.
At what sort of time did you discover it?
For surely it was not while you thought you knew.
No, indeed.
Then when did you think you were ignorant?
Consider; I believe you will fail to find such a time.
Upon my word, Socrates, I really cannot say.
So you do not know it by discovery.
Not at all, apparently.
But you said just now that you did not know it by learning either; and if you neither discovered nor learnt it, how do you come to know it, and whence?
Well, perhaps that answer I gave you was not correct, that I knew it by my own discovery.
Then how was it done?
I learnt it, I suppose, in the same way as everyone else.
Back we come to the same argument.
From whom?
Please tell me.
From the many.
They are no very serious teachers with whom you take refuge, if you ascribe it to the many!
Why, are they not competent to teach?
Not how to play, or not to play, draughts; and yet that, I imagine, is a slight matter compared with justice.
What?
Do you not think so?
Yes.
Then if they are unable to teach the slighter, can they teach the more serious matter?
I think so: at any rate, there are many other things that they are able to teach, more serious than draughts.
What sort of things?
For instance, it was from them that I learnt to speak Greek, and I could not say who was my teacher, but can only ascribe it to the same people who, you say, are not serious teachers.
Ah, gallant sir, the many may be good teachers of that, and they can justly be praised for their teaching of such subjects.
And why?
Because in those subjects they have the equipment proper to good teachers.
What do you mean by that?
You know that those who are going to teach anything should first know it themselves, do you not?
Of course.
And that those who know should agree with each other and not differ?
Yes.
But if they differ upon anything, will you say that they know it?
No, indeed.
Then how can they be teachers of it?
By no means.
Well now, do you find that the many differ about the nature of stone or wood?
If you ask one of them, do they not agree on the same answer, and make for the same things when they want to get a piece of stone or wood?
It is just the same, too, with everything of the sort: for I am pretty nearly right in understanding you to mean just this by knowing how to speak Greek, am I not?
Yes.
And on these matters, as we stated, they not only agree with each other and with themselves in private, but states also use in public the same terms about them to each other, without any dispute?
They do.
Then naturally they will be good teachers of these matters.
Yes.
And if we should wish to provide anyone with knowledge of them, we should be right in sending him to be taught by the many that you speak of?
Certainly.
But what if we wished to know not only what men were like or what horses were like, but which of them were good runners or not? Would the many still suffice to teach us this?
No, indeed.
And you have ample proof that they do not know this, and are not proficient teachers of it, in their not agreeing about it at all with themselves?
I have.
And what if we wished to know not only what men were like, but what healthy or diseased men were like? Would the many suffice to teach us?
No, indeed.
And you would have proof of their being bad teachers of that, if you saw them differing about it?
I should.
Well then, do you now find that the many agree with themselves or each other about just and unjust men or things?
Far from it, on my word, Socrates.
In fact, they differ most especially on these points?
Very much so.
And I suppose you never yet saw or heard of people differing so sharply on questions of health or the opposite as to fight and kill one another in battle because of them.
No, indeed.
But on questions of justice or injustice I am sure you have; and if you have not seen them, at any rate you have heard of them from many people, especially Homer.
For you have heard the Odyssey and the Iliad?
I certainly have, I suppose, Socrates.
And these poems are about a difference of just and unjust
Yes.
And from this difference arose the fights and deaths of the Achaeans, and of the Trojans as well, and of the suitors of Penelope in their strife with Odysseus.
That is true.
And I imagine that when the Athenians and Spartans and Boeotians lost their men at Tanagra, and later at Coronea, among whom your own father perished, the difference that caused their deaths and fights was solely on a question of just and unjust, was it not?
That is true.
Then are we to say that these people understand those questions, on which they differ so sharply that they are led by their mutual disputes to take these extreme measures against each other?
Apparently not.
And you refer me to teachers of that sort, whom you admit yourself to be without knowledge?
It seems I do.
Then how is it likely that you should know what is just and unjust, when you are so bewildered about these matters and are shown to have neither learnt them from anyone nor discovered them for yourself?.
By what you say, it is not likely.
There again, Alcibiades, do you see how unfairly you speak?
In what ?
In stating that I say so.
Why, do you not say that l do not know about the just and unjust?
Not at all.
Well, do I say it?
Yes.
How, pray ?
I will show you, in the following way.
If I ask you which is the greater number, one or two, you will answer two ?
Yes, I shall.
How much greater?
By one.
Then which of us says that two are one more than one?
I.
And I was asking, and you were answering?
Yes.
Then is it I, the questioner, or you the answerer, that are found to be speaking about these things?
I.
And what if I ask what are the letters in Socrates, and you tell me? Which will be the speaker?
I.
Come then, tell me, as a principle, when we have question and answer, which is the speaker the questioner, or the answerer?
The answerer, I should say, Socrates.
And throughout the argument so far, I was the questioner?
Yes.
And you the answerer?
Quite so.
Well then, which of us has spoken what has been said?
Apparently, Socrates, from what we have admitted, it was I.
And it was said that Alcibiades, the fair son of Cleinias, did not know about just and unjust, but thought he did, and intended to go to the Assembly as adviser to the Athenians on what he knows nothing about;
is not that so?
Apparently.
Then, to quote Euripides, the result is, Alcibiades, that you may be said to have heard it from yourself, not me, and it is not I who say it, but you, and you tax me with it in vain.
And indeed what you say is quite true.
For it is a mad scheme this, that you meditate, my excellent friend of teaching things that you do not know, since you have taken no care to learn them.
I think, Socrates, that the Athenians and the rest of the Greeks rarely deliberate as to which is the more just or unjust course: for they regard questions of this sort as obvious; and so they pass them over and consider which course will prove more expedient in the result.
For the just and the expedient, I take it, are not the same, but many people have profited by great wrongs that they have committed, whilst others, I imagine, have had no advantage from doing what was right.
What then?
Granting that the just and the expedient are in fact as different as they can be, you surely do not still suppose you know what is expedient for mankind, and why it is so?
Well, what is the obstacle, Socrates
unless you are going to ask me again from whom I learnt it, or how I discovered it for myself?
What a way of going on!
If your answer is incorrect, and a previous argument can be used to prove it so, you claim to be told something new, and a different line of proof, as though the previous one were like a poor worn-out coat which you refuse to wear any longer; you must be provided instead with something clean and unsoiled in the way of evidence.
But I shall ignore your sallies in debate, and shall none the less ask you once more, where you learnt your knowledge of what is expedient, and who is your teacher, asking in one question all the things I asked before;
and now you will clearly find yourself in the same plight, and will be unable to prove that you know the expedient either through discovery or through learning.
But as you are dainty, and would dislike a repeated taste of the same argument, I pass over this question of whether you know or do not know what is expedient for the Athenians: but why have you not made it clear whether the just and the expedient are the same or different?
If you like, question me as I did you, or if you prefer, argue out the matter in your own way.
But I am not sure I should be able, Socrates, to set it forth to you.
Well, my good sir, imagine I am the people in Assembly; even there, you know, you will have to persuade each man singly, will you not?
Yes.
And the same man may well persuade one person singly, and many together, about things that he knows, just as the schoolmaster, I suppose, persuades either one or many about letters?
Yes.
And again, will not the same man persuade either one or many about number?
Yes.
And this will be the man who knows the arithmetician?
Quite so.
And you too can persuade a single man about things of which you can persuade many?
Presumably.
And these are clearly things that you know.
Yes.
And the only difference between the orator speaking before the people and one who speaks in a conversation like ours is that the former persuades men in a number together of the same things, and the latter persuades them one at a time?
It looks like it.
Come now, since we see that the same man may persuade either many or one, try your unpracticed hand on me, and endeavor to show that the just is sometimes not expedient.
You are insolent, Socrates!
This time, at any rate, I am going to have the insolence to persuade you of the opposite of that which you decline to prove to me.
Speak, then.
Just answer my questions.
No, you yourself must be the speaker.
What?
Do you not wish above all things to be persuaded?
By all means, to be sure.
And you would best be persuaded if you should say the case is so?
I agree.
Then answer; and if you do not hear your own self say that the just is expedient, put no trust in the words of anyone again.
I will not: but I may as well answer; for I do not think I shall come to any harm.
You are quite a prophet!
Now tell me, do you consider some just things to be expedient, and others not?
Yes.
And again, some noble, and some not?
What do you mean by that question?
I would ask whether anyone ever seemed to you to be doing what was base and yet just.
Never.
Well, are all just things noble?
Yes.
And what of noble things, in their turn?
Are they all good, or some only, while others are not?
In my opinion, Socrates, some noble things are evil.
And some base things are good?
Yes.
Do you mean as in one of the many cases where men have gone to rescue a comrade or kinsman in battle, and have been either wounded or killed, while those who did not go to the rescue, as duty bade, have got off safe and sound?
Precisely.
And such a rescue you call noble, in respect of the endeavor to save those whom it was one's duty to save; and this is courage, is it not?
Yes.
But you call it evil, in respect of the deaths and wounds?
Yes.
And is not the courage one thing, and the death another?
Certainly.
Then it is not in the same respect that rescuing one's friends is noble and evil?
Apparently not.
Then see if, inasmuch as it is noble, it is also good;
for in the present case you were admitting that the rescue was noble in respect of its courage: now consider this very thing, courage, and say whether it is good or bad.
Consider it in this way: which would you choose to have, good things or evil?
Good.
And most of all, the greatest goods,
Yes.
and of such things you would least allow yourself to be deprived?
To be sure.
Then what do you say of courage?
At what price would you allow yourself to be deprived of it?
I would give up life itself if I had to be a coward.
Then you regard cowardice as the uttermost evil.
I do.
On a par with death, it seems.
Yes.
And life and courage are the extreme opposites of death and cowardice?
Yes.
And you would most desire to have the former, and least the latter?
Yes.
Is that because you think the former best, and the latter worst?
To be sure.
So you reckon courage among the best things, and death among the worst.
I do.
Then the rescue of one's friends in battle, inasmuch as it is noble in respect of the working of good by courage, you have termed noble?
Apparently.
But evil, in respect of the working of evil by death?
Yes.
So we may fairly describe each of these workings as follows: as you call either of them evil because of the evil it produces, so you must call it good because of the good it produces.
I believe that is so.
And again, are they noble inasmuch as they are good, and base inasmuch as they are evil?
Yes.
Then in saying that the rescue of one's friends in battle is noble and yet evil, you mean just the same as if you called the rescue good, but evil.
I believe what you say is true, Socrates.
So nothing noble, in so far as it is noble, is evil, and nothing base, in so far as it is base, is good.
Apparently.
Now then, consider it again in this way:
whoever does nobly, does well too, does he not?
Yes.
And are not those who do well happy?
Of course.
And they are happy because of the acquisition of good things?
Certainly.
And they acquire these by doing well and nobly?
Yes.
So doing well is good?
Of course.
And welfare is noble?
Yes.
Hence we have seen again that noble and good are the same thing.
Apparently.
Then whatever we find to be noble we shall find also to be good, by this argument at least.
We must.
Well then, are good things expedient or not?
Expedient.
And do you remember what our admissions were about just things?
I think we said that those who do just things must do noble things.
And that those who do noble things must do good things?
Yes.
And that good things are expedient?
Yes.
Hence just things, Alcibiades, are expedient.
So it seems.
Well now, are not you the speaker of all this, and I the questioner?
I seem to be, apparently.
So if anyone stands up to advise either the Athenians or the Peparethians, imagining that he understands what is just and unjust, and says that just things are sometimes evil, could you do other than laugh him to scorn, since you actually say yourself that just and expedient are the same?
But by Heaven, Socrates, I do not even know what I am saying, I feel altogether in such a strange state!
For from moment to moment I change my view under your questioning.
And are you unaware, my friend, what this feeling is?
I am, quite.
Well, do you suppose that if someone should ask you whether you have two eyes or three, two hands or four, or anything else of that sort, you would answer differently from moment to moment, or always the same thing?
I begin to have misgivings about myself, but still I think I should make the same answer.
And the reason would be, because you know?
I think so.
Then if you involuntarily give contradictory answers, clearly it must be about things of which you are ignorant.
Very likely.
And you say you are bewildered in answering about just and unjust, noble and base, evil and good, expedient and inexpedient?
Now, is it not obvious that your bewilderment is caused by your ignorance of these things?
I agree.
Then is it the case that when a man does not know a thing he must needs be bewildered in spirit regarding that thing?
Yes, of course.
Well now, do you know in what way you can ascend to heaven?
On my word, not I.
Is that too a kind of question about which your judgement is bewildered?
No, indeed.
Do you know the reason, or shall I state it?
State it.
It is, my friend, that while not knowing the matter you do not suppose that you know it.
Here again, how do you mean?
Do your share, in seeing for yourself.
Are you bewildered about the kind of thing that you do not know and are aware of not knowing?
For instance, you know, I suppose, that you do not know about the preparation of a tasty dish?
Quite so.
Then do you think for yourself how you are to prepare it, and get bewildered, or do you entrust it to the person who knows?
I do the latter.
And what if you should be on a ship at sea? Would you think whether the tiller should be moved inwards or outwards, and in your ignorance bewilder yourself, or would you entrust it to the helmsman, and be quiet?
I would leave it to him.
So you are not bewildered about what you do not know, so long as you know that you do not know?
It seems I am not,
Then do you note that mistakes in action also are due to this ignorance of thinking one knows when one does not?
Here again, how do you mean?
We set about acting, I suppose, when we think we know what we are doing?
Yes.
But when people think they do not know, I suppose they hand it over to others?
To be sure.
And so that kind of ignorant person makes no mistakes in life, because they entrust such matters to others?
Yes.
Who then are those who make mistakes?
For, I take it, they cannot be those who know.
No, indeed.
But since it is neither those who know, nor those of the ignorant who know that they do not know, the only people left, I think, are those who do not know, but think that they do?
Yes, only those.
Then this ignorance is a cause of evils, and is the discreditable sort of stupidity?
Yes.
And when it is about the greatest matters, it is most injurious and base?
By far.
Well then, can you mention any greater things than the just, the noble, the good, and the expedient?
No, indeed.
And it is about these, you say, that you are bewildered?
Yes.
But if you are bewildered, is it not clear from what has gone before that you are not only ignorant of the greatest things, but while not knowing them you think that you do?
I am afraid so.
Alack then, Alcibiades, for the plight you are in!
I shrink indeed from giving it a name, but still, as we are alone, let me speak out.
You are wedded to stupidity, my fine friend, of the vilest kind; you are impeached of this by your own words, out of your own mouth;
and this, it seems, is why you dash into politics before you have been educated.
And you are not alone in this plight, but you share it with most of those who manage our city's affairs, except just a few, and perhaps your guardian, Pericles.
Yes, you know, Socrates, they say he did not get his wisdom independently, but consorted with many wise men, such as Pythocleides and Anaxagoras;
and now, old as he is, he still confers with Damon for that very purpose.
Well, but did you ever find a man who was wise in anything and yet unable to make another man wise in the same things as himself?
For instance, the man who taught you letters was wise himself, and also made you wise, and anyone else he wished to, did he not?
Yes.
And you too, who learnt from him, will be able to make another man wise?
Yes.
And the same holds of the harper and the trainer?
Certainly.
For, I presume, it is a fine proof of one's knowing anything that one knows, when one is able to point to another man whom one has made to know it.
I agree.
Well then, can you tell me whom Pericles made wise? One of his sons, to begin with?
But what if the two sons of Pericles were simpletons, Socrates?
Well, Cleinias, your brother.
But why should you mention Cleinias, a madman?
Well, if Cleinias is mad and the two sons of Pericles were simpletons, what reason are we to assign, in your case, for his allowing you to be in your present condition?
I believe I am myself to blame for not attending to him.
But tell me of any other Athenian or foreigner, slave or freeman, who is accounted to have become wiser through converse with Pericles; as I can tell you that Pythodorus son of Isolochus, and Callias, son of Calliades, became through that of Zeno; each of them has paid Zeno a hundred minae, and has become both wise and distinguished.
Well, upon my word, I cannot.
Very good: then what is your intention regarding yourself?
Will you remain as you are, or take some trouble?
We must put our heads together, Socrates.
And indeed, as soon as you speak, I take the point and agree.
For the men who manage the city's affairs, apart from a few, do strike me as uneducated.
Then what does that mean?
That if they were educated, I suppose anyone who undertook to contend against them would have to get some knowledge and practice first, as he would for a match with athletes: but now, seeing that these men have gone in for politics as amateurs, what need is there for me to practise and have the trouble of learning?
For I am sure that my natural powers alone will give me an easy victory over them.
Ho, ho, my good sir, what a thing to say!
How unworthy of your looks and your other advantages!
What is your meaning now, Socrates? What is the connection?
I am grieved for you, and for my love.
Why, pray?
That you should expect your contest to be with the men we have here.
Well, but with whom is it to be?
Is that a worthy question to be asked by a man who considers himself high-spirited?
How do you mean? Is not my contest with these men?
Well, suppose you were intending to steer a warship into action, would you be content to be the best hand among the crew at steering or, while regarding this skill as a necessary qualification, would you keep your eye on your actual opponents in the fight, and not, as now, on your fellow-fighters?
These, I conceive, you ought so far to surpass that they would not feel fit to be your opponents, but only to be your despised fellow-fighters against the enemy, if you mean really to make your mark with some noble action that will be worthy both of yourself and of the city.
Why, I do mean to.
So you think it quite fitting for you to be satisfied if you are better than the soldiers, but neglect to keep your eye on the enemy's leaders with a view to showing yourself better than they are, or to plan and practise against them!
Of whom are you speaking now, Socrates?
Do you not know that our city makes war occasionally on the Spartans and on the Great King?
That is true.
And if you are minded to be the head of our state, you would be right in thinking that your contest is with the kings of Sparta and of Persia?
That sounds like the truth.
No, my good friend; you ought rather to keep your eye on Meidias the quail-filliper and others of his sort who undertake to manage the city's affairs, while they still have the slavish hair (as the women would say) showing in their minds through their lack of culture, and have not yet got rid of it; who, moreover, have come with their outlandish speech to flatter the state, not to rule it
to these, I tell you, should your eyes be turned; and then you can disregard yourself, and need neither learn what is to be learnt for the great contest in which you are to be engaged, nor practise what requires practice, and so ensure that you are perfectly prepared before entering upon a political career.
Why, Socrates, I believe you are right; though I think neither the Spartan generals nor the Persian king are at all different from other people.
But, my excellent friend, consider what this notion of yours means.
In regard to what?
First of all, do you think you would take more pains over yourself if you feared them and thought them terrible, or if you did not?
Clearly, if I thought them terrible.
And do you think you will come to any harm by taking pains over yourself?
By no means; rather that I shall get much benefit.
And on this single count that notion of yours is so much to the bad.
True.
Then, in the second place, observe the probability that it is false.
How so?
Is it probable that noble races should produce better natures, or not?
Clearly, noble races would.
And will not the well-born, provided they are well brought up, probably be perfected in virtue?
That must be so.
Then let us consider, by comparing our lot with theirs, whether the Spartan and Persian kings appear to be of inferior birth.
Do we not know that the former are descendants of Hercules and the latter of Achaemenes, and that the line of Hercules and the line of Achaemenes go back to Perseus, son of Zeus?
Yes, and mine, Socrates, to Eurysaces, and that of Eurysaces to Zeus!
Yes, and mine, noble Alcibiades, to Daedalus, and Daedalus to Hephaestus, son of Zeus!
But take the lines of those people, going back from them: you have a succession of kings reaching to Zeus on the one hand, kings of Argos and Sparta; on the other, of Persia, which they have always ruled, and frequently Asia also, as at present; whereas we are private persons ourselves, and so were our fathers.
And then, suppose that you had to make what show you could of your ancestors, and of Salamis as the native land of Eurysaces, or of Aegina as the home of the yet earlier Aeacus, to impress Artaxerxes, son of Xerxes, how you must expect to be laughed at!
Why, I am afraid we are quite outdone by those persons in pride of birth and upbringing altogether.
Or have you not observed how great are the advantages of the Spartan kings, and how their wives are kept under statutory ward of the ephors, in order that every possible precaution may be taken against the king being born of any but the Heracleidae?
And the Persian king so far surpasses us that no one has a suspicion that he could have been born of anybody but the king before him; and hence the king's wife has nothing to guard her except fear.
When the eldest son, the heir to the throne, is born, first of all the king's subjects who are in his palace have a feast, and then for ever after on that date the whole of Asia celebrates the king's birthday with sacrifice and feasting:
but when we are born, as the comic poet says, even the neighbors barely notice it, Alcibiades.
After that comes the nurture of the child, not at the hands of a woman-nurse of little worth, but of the most highly approved eunuchs in the king's service, who are charged with the whole tendance of the new-born child, and especially with the business of making him as handsome as possible by moulding his limbs into a correct shape; and while doing this they are in high honor.
When the boys are seven years old they are given horses and have riding lessons, and they begin to follow the chase.
And when the boy reaches fourteen years he is taken over by the royal tutors, as they call them there: these are four men chosen as the most highly esteemed among the Persians of mature age, namely, the wisest one, the justest one, the most temperate one, and the bravest one.
The first of these teaches him the magian lore of Zoroaster, son of Horomazes; and that is the worship of the gods: he teaches him also what pertains to a king.
The justest teaches him to be truthful all his life long;
the most temperate, not to be mastered by even a single pleasure, in order that he may be accustomed to be a free man and a veritable king, who is the master first of all that is in him, not the slave;
while the bravest trains him to be fearless and undaunted, telling him that to be daunted is to be enslaved.
But you, Alcibiades, had a tutor set over you by Pericles from amongst his servants, who was old as to be the most useless of them, Zopyrus the Thracian.
I might describe to you at length the nurture and education of your competitors, were it not too much of a task; and besides, what I have said suffices to show the rest that follows thereon. But about your birth, Alcibiades, or nurture or education, or about those of any other Athenian, one may say that nobody cares, unless it be some lover whom you chance to have.
And again, if you chose to glance at the wealth, the luxury, the robes with sweeping trains, the anointings with myrrh, the attendant troops of menials, and all the other refinements of the Persians, you would be ashamed at your own case, on perceiving its inferiority to theirs.
Should you choose, again, to look at the temperance and orderliness, the facility and placidity, the magnanimity and discipline, the courage and endurance, and the toil-loving, success-loving, honor-loving spirit of the Spartans, you would count yourself but a child in all these things.
If again you regard wealth, and think yourself something in that way, I must not keep silence on this point either, if you are to realize where you stand.
For in this respect you have only to look at the wealth of the Spartans, and you will perceive that our riches here are far inferior to theirs.
Think of all the land that they have both in their own and in the Messenian country: not one of our estates could compete with theirs in extent and excellence, nor again in ownership of slaves, and especially of those of the helot class, nor yet of horses, nor of all the flocks and herds that graze in Messene.
However, I pass over all these things: but there is more gold and silver privately held in Lacedaemon than in the whole of Greece;
for during many generations treasure has been passing in to them from every part of Greece, and often from the barbarians also, but not passing out to anyone; and just as in the fable of Aesop, where the fox remarked to the lion on the direction of the footmarks, the traces of the money going into Lacedaemon are clear enough, but nowhere are any to be seen of it coming out; so that one can be pretty sure that those people are the richest of the Greeks in gold and silver,
and that among themselves the richest is the king; for the largest and most numerous receipts of the kind are those of the kings, and besides there is the levy of the royal tribute in no slight amount, which the Spartans pay to their kings.
Now, the Spartan fortunes, though great compared with the wealth of other Greeks, are nought beside that of the Persians and their king.
For I myself was once told by a trustworthy person, who had been up to their court, that he traversed a very large tract of excellent land, nearly a day's journey, which the inhabitants called the girdle of the king's wife, and another which was similarly called her veil; and many other fine and fertile regions reserved for the adornment of the consort;
and each of these regions was named after some part of her apparel.
So I imagine, if someone should say to the king's mother Amestris, who was wife of Xerxes, The son of Deinomache intends to challenge your son; the mother's dresses are worth perhaps fifty minae at the outside, while the son has under three hundred acres at Erchiae,
she would wonder to what on earth this Alcibiades could be trusting, that he proposed to contend against Artaxerxes; and I expect she would remark The only possible things that the man can be trusting to for his enterprise are industry and wisdom; for these are the only things of any account among the Greeks.
Whereas if she were informed that this Alcibiades who is actually making such an attempt is, in the first place, as yet barely twenty years old, and secondly, altogether uneducated; and further, that when his lover tells him that he must first learn, and take pains over himself, and practise, before he enters on a contest with the king, he refuses, and says he will do very well as he is;
I expect she would ask in surprise, On what, then, can the youngster rely?
And if we told her, On beauty, stature, birth, wealth, and mental gifts, she would conclude we were mad, Alcibiades, when she compared the advantages of her own people in all these respects.
And I imagine that even Lampido, daughter of Leotychides and wife of Archidamus and mother of Agis, who have all been kings, would wonder in the same way, when she compared her people's resources, at your intention of having a contest with her son despite your bad upbringing.
And yet, does it not strike you as disgraceful that our enemies' wives should have a better idea of the qualities that we need for an attempt against them than we have ourselves?
Ah, my remarkable friend, listen to me and the Delphic motto, Know thyself ; for these people are our competitors, not those whom you think; and there is nothing that will give us ascendancy over them save only pains and skill.
If you are found wanting in these, you will be found wanting also in achievement of renown among Greeks and barbarians both; and of this I observe you to be more enamored than anyone else ever was of anything.
Well then, what are the pains that I must take, Socrates?
Can you enlighten me?
For I must say your words are remarkably like the truth.
Yes, I can: but we must put our heads together, you know, as to the way in which we can improve ourselves to the utmost.
For observe that when I speak of the need of being educated I am not referring only to you, apart from myself; since my case is identical with yours except in one point.
What is that?
My guardian is better and wiser than your one, Pericles.
Who is he, Socrates?
God, Alcibiades, who until this day would not let me converse with you; and trusting in him I say that through no other man but me will you attain to eminence.
You are jesting, Socrates.
Perhaps; I am right, however, in saying that we need to take pains all men rather badly, but we two very badly indeed.
As to me, you are not wrong.
Nor, I fear, as to myself either.
Then what can we do?
There must be no crying off or skulking, my good friend.
No, for that would indeed be unseemly, Socrates.
It would; so let us consider in common.
Now tell me: we say, do we not, that we wish to be as good as possible?
Yes.
In what excellence?
Clearly that which is the aim of good men.
Good in what?
Clearly, good in the management of affairs.
What sort of affairs?
Horsemanship?
No, no.
Because we should apply to horsemen?
Yes.
Well, seamanship, do you mean?
No.
Because we should apply to seamen?
Yes.
Well, what sort of thing?
The business of what men?
Of Athenian gentlemen.
Do you mean by gentlemen the intelligent or the unintelligent?
The intelligent.
And everyone is good in that wherein he is intelligent?
Yes.
And bad wherein he is unintelligent?
Of course.
Then is the shoemaker intelligent in the making of foot-gear?
Certainly.
So he is good in that article?
Good.
Well now, is not the shoemaker unintelligent in the making of clothes?
Yes.
So he is bad in that?
Yes.
Then, on this showing, the same man is both bad and good.
Apparently.
Well, can you say that good men are also bad?
No, indeed.
But whoever do you mean by the good?
I mean those who are able to rule in the city.
Not, I presume, over horses?
No, no.
But over men?
Yes.
When they are sick?
No.
Or at sea?
I say, no.
Or harvesting?
No.
Doing nothing, or doing something?
Doing something, I say.
Doing what? Try and let me know.
Well, men who do business with each other and make use of one another, as is our way of life in our cities.
Then you speak of ruling over men who make use of men?
Yes.
Over boatswains who make use of rowers?
No, no.
Because that is the pilot's distinction?
Yes.
Well, do you mean ruling over men who are flute-players, and who lead the singing and make use of dancers?
No, no.
Because, again, that is the chorus-teacher's function?
To be sure.
But whatever do you mean by being able to rule over men who make use of men?
I mean ruling over men in the city who share in it as fellow-citizens, and do business with each other.
Well, what art is this?
Suppose I should ask you over again, as I did just now, what art makes men know how to rule over fellow-sailors?
The pilot's.
And what knowledge to repeat what was said a moment ago makes them rule over their fellow-singers?
That which you just mentioned, the chorus-teacher's.
Well now, what do you call the knowledge of one's fellow-citizens?
Good counsel, I should say, Socrates.
Well, and is the pilot's knowledge evil counsel?
No, no.
Rather good counsel?
So I should think, for the preservation of his passengers.
Quite right.
And now, for what is the good counsel of which you speak?
For the better management and preservation of the city.
And what is it that becomes present or absent when we get this better management and preservation?
If, for example, you should ask me, What is it that becomes present or absent when the body is better managed and preserved?
I should reply, Health becomes present, and disease absent.
Do not you think so too?
Yes.
And if, again, you asked me, What becomes present in a better condition of the eyes?
I should answer in just the same way, Sight becomes present, and blindness absent.
So, in the case of the ears, deafness is caused to be absent, and hearing to be present, when they are improved and getting better treatment.
Correct.
Well then, what is it that becomes present or absent when a state is improved and has better treatment and management?
To my mind, Socrates, friendship with one another will be there, while hatred and faction will be absent.
Now, by friendship do you mean agreement or disagreement?
Agreement.
And what art is it that causes states to agree about numbers?
Arithmetic.
And what of individuals?
Is it not the same art?
Yes.
And it makes each single person agree with himself?
Yes.
And what art makes each of us agree with himself as to which is the longer, a span or a cubit?
Is it not mensuration?
Of course.
And it makes both individuals and states agree with each other?
Yes.
And what about the balance? Is it not the same here too?
It is.
Then what is that agreement of which you speak, and about what? And what art secures it?
And is it the same in an individual as in a state, when one agrees with oneself and with another?
Most likely.
Well, what is it?
Do not flag in your answers, but do your best to tell me.
I suppose I mean the friendship and agreement that you find when a father and mother love their son, and between brother and brother, and husband and wife.
Then do you suppose, Alcibiades, that a husband can possibly agree with his wife about woolwork, when he does not understand it, and she does?
Oh, no.
Nor has he any need, since that is a woman's pursuit.
Yes.
Or again, could a woman agree with a man about soldiering, when she has not learnt it?
Oh, no.
Because, I expect you will say again, that is a man's affair.
I would.
Then, by your account, there are some pursuits belonging to women, and some to men?
Of course.
So in these, at any rate, there is no agreement between men and women.
No.
And hence no friendship either, if, as we said, friendship is agreement.
Apparently not.
So women are not loved by men, in so far as they do their own work.
It seems not.
Nor are men by women, in so far as they do theirs.
No.
And states, therefore, are not well ordered in so far as each person does his own business?
I think they are, Socrates.
How can you say that? Without the presence of friendship, which we say must be there if states are well ordered, as otherwise they are not?
But it seems to me that friendship arises among them just on that account that each of the two parties does its own business.
It was not so a moment since: but now, what do you mean this time?
Does friendship arise where there is no agreement?
And is it possible that agreement should arise where some know about the business, but others do not?
Impossible.
And are they doing what is just or unjust, when each man does his own business?
What is just, of course.
And when the citizens do what is just in the city, does not friendship arise among them?
Again I think that must be so, Socrates.
Then whatever do you mean by that friendship or agreement about which we must be wise and well-advised in order that we may be good men?
For I am unable to learn either what it is, or in whom; since it appears that the same persons sometimes have it, and sometimes not, by your account.
Well, by Heaven, Socrates, I do not even know what I mean myself, and I fear that for some time past I have lived unawares in a disgraceful condition.
But you must take heart.
For had you perceived your plight at fifty, it would be hard for you to take pains with yourself; whereas here you are at the time of life when one ought to perceive it.
Then what should one do on perceiving it, Socrates?
Answer the questions asked, Alcibiades: only do that, and with Heaven's favor if we are to put any trust in my divination you and I shall both be in better case.
That shall be, so far as my answering can avail.
Come then, what is taking pains over oneself for we may perchance be taking, unawares, no pains over ourselves, though we think we are and when does a man actually do it?
Does he take pains over himself at the same time as over his own things?
I at least believe so.
Well now, when does a man take pains over his feet?
Is it when he takes pains over what belongs to his feet?
I do not understand.
Is there anything you can name as belonging to the hand?
For instance, does a ring belong to any other part of a man but the finger?
No, indeed.
And so the shoe also belongs to the foot, in the same way?
Yes.
And likewise clothes and coverlets belong to the whole body?
Yes.
Now when we take pains over our shoes, we take pains over our feet?
I do not quite understand, Socrates.
Well, but, Alcibiades, you speak of taking proper pains over this or that matter, do you not?
I do.
And do you call it proper pains when someone makes a thing better?
Yes.
Then what art makes shoes better?
Shoe-making.
So by shoe-making we take pains over our shoes?
Yes.
And over our foot too by shoe-making?
Or by that art whereby we make feet better?
By that art.
And is it not the same one for making our feet as for making the whole body better?
I think so.
And is not that gymnastic?
Certainly.
So by gymnastic we take pains over our foot, but by shoe-making over what belongs to our foot?
Quite so.
And by gymnastic over our hands, but by ring-engraving over what belongs to the hand?
Yes.
And by gymnastic over the body, but by weaving and the rest over what belongs to the body?
Absolutely so.
Then for taking pains over a thing itself and over what belongs to it we use different arts.
Apparently.
So when you take pains over your belongings you are not taking pains over yourself.
Not at all.
For the arts, it seems, that one used for taking pains over oneself and over one's belongings would not be the same.
Apparently not.
Come then, whatever kind of art can we use for taking pains over ourselves?
I cannot say.
Well, so much at least has been admitted, that it is not one which would help us to make a single one of our possessions better, but one which would help to make ourselves so?
That is true.
Now, should we ever have known what art makes a shoe better, if we had not known a shoe?
Impossible.
Nor could we know what art makes rings better, if we had no cognizance of a ring.
True.
Well then, could we ever know what art makes the man himself better, if we were ignorant of what we are ourselves?
Impossible.
Well, and is it an easy thing to know oneself, and was it a mere scamp who inscribed these words on the temple at Delphi; or is it a hard thing, and not a task for anybody?
I have often thought, Socrates, that it was for anybody; but often, too, that it was very hard.
But, Alcibiades, whether it is easy or not, here is the fact for us all the same: if we have that knowledge, we are like to know what pains to take over ourselves; but if we have it not, we never can.
That is so.
Come then, in what way can the same-in-itself be discovered?
For thus we may discover what we are ourselves; whereas if we remain in ignorance of it we must surely fail.
Rightly spoken.
Steady, then, in Heaven's name!
To whom are you talking now?
To me, are you not?
Yes.
And I in turn to you ?
Yes.
Then the talker is Socrates?
To be sure.
And the hearer, Alcibiades?
Yes.
And Socrates uses speech in talking?
Of course.
And you call talking and using speech the same thing, I suppose.
To be sure.
But the user and the thing he uses are different, are they not?
How do you mean?
For instance, I suppose a shoemaker uses a round tool, and a square one, and others, when he cuts.
Yes.
And the cutter and user is quite different from what he uses in cutting?
Of course.
And in the same way what the harper uses in harping will be different from the harper himself?
Yes.
Well then, that is what I was asking just now whether the user and what he uses are always, in your opinion, two different things.
They are.
Then what are we to say of the shoemaker?
Does he cut with his tools only, or with his hands as well?
With his hands as well.
So he uses these also?
Yes.
Does he use his eyes, too, in his shoe-making?
Yes.
And we admit that the user and what he uses are different things?
Yes.
Then the shoemaker and the harper are different from the hands and eyes that they use for their work?
Apparently.
And man uses his whole body too?
To be sure.
And we said that the user and what he uses are different?
Yes.
So man is different from his own body?
It seems so.
Then whatever is man?
I cannot say.
Oh, but you can that he is the user of the body.
Yes.
And the user of it must be the soul?
It must.
And ruler?
Yes.
Now, here is a remark from which no one, I think, can dissent.
What is it?
That man must be one of three things.
What things?
Soul, body, or both together as one whole.
Very well.
But yet we have admitted that what actually rules the body is man?
We have.
And does the body rule itself?
By no means.
Because we have said that it is ruled.
Yes.
Then that cannot be what we are seeking.
It seems not.
Well then, does the combination of the two rule the body, so that we are to regard this as man?
Perhaps it is.
The unlikeliest thing in the world: for if one of the two does not share in the rule, it is quite inconceivable that the combination of the two can be ruling.
You are right.
But since neither the body nor the combination of the two is man, we are reduced, I suppose, to this: either man is nothing at all, or if something, he turns out to be nothing else than soul.
Precisely so.
Well, do you require some yet clearer proof that the soul is man?
No, I assure you: I think it is amply proved.
And if it is tolerably, though not exactly, we are content; exact knowledge will be ours later, when we have discovered the thing that we passed over just now because it would involve much consideration.
What is that?
The point suggested in that remark a moment ago, that we should first consider the same-in-itself; but so far, instead of the same, we have been considering what each single thing is in itself.
And perhaps we shall be satisfied with that: for surely we cannot say that anything has more absolute possession of ourselves than the soul.
No, indeed.
And it is proper to take the view that you and I are conversing with each other, while we make use of words, by intercourse of soul with soul?
Quite so.
Well, that is just what we suggested a little while ago that Socrates, in using words to talk with Alcibiades, is holding speech, not with your face, it would seem, but with Alcibiades that is, with his soul.
I believe so.
Then he who enjoins a knowledge of oneself bids us become acquainted with the soul.
So it seems.
And anyone who gets to know something belonging to the body knows the things that are his, but not himself.
That is so.
Then no physician, in so far as he is a physician, knows himself, nor does any trainer, in so far as he is a trainer.
It seems not.
And farmers, and craftsmen generally, are far from knowing themselves.
For these people, it would seem, do not even know their own things, but only things still more remote than their own things, in respect of the arts which they follow; since they know but the things of the body, with which it is tended.
That is true.
So if knowing oneself is temperance, none of these people is temperate in respect of his art.
None, I agree.
And that is why these arts are held to be sordid, and no acquirements for a good man.
Quite so.
Then once again, whoever tends his body tends his own things, but not himself?
It looks rather like it.
But whoever tends his money tends neither himself nor his own things, but only things yet more remote than his own things?
I agree.
So that the money-maker has ceased to do his own business.
Correct.
And if anyone is found to be a lover of Alcibiades' body, he has fallen in love, not with Alcibiades, but with something belonging to Alcibiades?
That is true.
Your lover is rather he who loves your soul?
He must be, apparently, by our argument.
And he who loves your body quits you, and is gone, as soon as its bloom is over?
Apparently.
Whereas he who loves your soul will not quit you so long as it makes for what is better?
So it seems.
And I am he who does not quit you, but remains with you when your body's prime is over, and the rest have departed.
Yes, and I am glad of it, Socrates, and hope you will not go.
Then you must endeavor to be as handsome as you can.
Well, I shall endeavor.
You see how you stand: Alcibiades, the son of Cleinias, it seems, neither had nor has any lover except one only, and that a cherished one, , the son of Sophroniscus and Phaenarete.
True.
And you said that I only just anticipated you in coming to you, for otherwise you would have come to me first for the purpose of inquiring why I am the only one who does not leave you?
Yes, that was so.
Then the reason was that I was the only lover of you, whereas the rest were lovers of what is yours; and that is losing its charm, while you are beginning to bloom.
So now, if you are not blighted and deformed by the Athenian people, I shall never forsake you.
For my chiefest fear is of your being blighted by becoming a lover of the people, since many a good Athenian has come to that ere now.
For fair of face is the people of great-hearted Erechtheus; but you should get a view of it stripped: so take the precaution that I recommend.
What is it?
Exercise yourself first, my wonderful friend, in learning what you ought to know before entering on politics; you must wait till you have learnt, in order that you may be armed with an antidote and so come to no harm.
Your advice seems to me good, Socrates; but try to explain in what way we can take pains over ourselves.
Well, we have made one step in advance; for there is a pretty fair agreement now as to what we are, whereas we were afraid we might fail of this and take pains, without knowing it, over something other than ourselves.
That is so.
And the next step, we see, is to take care of the soul, and look to that.
Clearly.
While handing over to others the care of our bodies and our coffers.
Quite so.
Then how shall we obtain the most certain knowledge of it?
For if we know that, it seems we shall know ourselves also.
In Heaven's name, do we fail to comprehend the wise words of the Delphic inscription, which we mentioned just now?
With what intent do you say that, Socrates?
I will tell you what I suspect to be the real advice which the inscription gives us.
I rather think there are not many illustrations of it to be found, but only in the case of sight.
What do you mean by that?
Consider in your turn:
suppose that, instead of speaking to a man, it said to the eye of one of us, as a piece of advice See thyself, how should we apprehend the meaning of the admonition?
Would it not be, that the eye should look at that by looking at which it would see itself?
Clearly.
Then let us think what object there is anywhere, by looking at which we can see both it and ourselves.
Why, clearly, Socrates, mirrors and things of that sort.
Quite right.
And there is also something of that sort in the eye that we see with?
To be sure.
And have you observed that the face of the person who looks into another's eye is shown in the optic confronting him, as in a mirror, and we call this the pupil, for in a sort it is an image of the person looking?
That is true.
Then an eye viewing another eye, and looking at the most perfect part of it, the thing wherewith it sees, will thus see itself.
Apparently.
But if it looks at any other thing in man or at anything in nature but what resembles this, it will not see itself.
That is true.
Then if an eye is to see itself, it must look at an eye, and at that region of the eye in which the virtue of an eye is found to occur; and this, I presume, is sight.
That is so.
And if the soul too, my dear Alcibiades, is to know herself, she must surely look at a soul, and especially at that region of it in which occurs the virtue of a soul wisdom, and at any other part of a soul which resembles this?
I agree, Socrates.
And can we find any part of the soul that we can call more divine than this, which is the seat of knowledge and thought?
We cannot.
Apparently.
And self-knowledge we admitted to be temperance.
To be sure.
So if we have no knowledge of ourselves and no temperance, shall we be able to know our own belongings, good or evil?
How can that be, Socrates?
For I expect it seems impossible to you that without knowing Alcibiades you should know that the belongings of Alcibiades are in fact his.
Impossible indeed, upon my word.
Nor could we know that our belongings are ours if we did not even know ourselves?
How could we?
And so, if we did not so much as know our belongings, we could not know the belongings of our belongings either?
Apparently not.
Then we were not quite correct in admitting just now that there are people who, without knowing themselves, know their belongings, while others know their belongings' belongings. For it seems to be the function of one man and one art to discern all three himself, his belongings, and the belongings of his belongings.
It looks like it.
And anyone who is ignorant of his belongings will be similarly ignorant, I suppose, of the belongings of others.
Quite so.
And if ignorant of others' affairs, he will be ignorant also of the affairs of states.
He must be.
Then such a man can never be a statesman.
No, indeed.
No, nor an economist either.
No, indeed.
Nor will he know what he is doing.
No, I agree.
And will not he who does not know make mistakes?
To be sure.
And when he makes mistakes, will he not do ill both in private and in public?
Of course.
And doing ill he will be wretched?
Yes, very.
And what of those for whom he is doing so?
They will be wretched also.
Then it is impossible to be happy if one is not temperate and good.
Impossible.
So it is the bad men who are wretched.
Yes, very.
And hence it is not he who has made himself rich that is relieved of wretchedness, but he who has made himself temperate.
Apparently.
So it is not walls or warships or arsenals that cities need, Alcibiades, if they are to be happy, nor numbers, nor size, without virtue.
No, indeed.
And if you are to manage the city's affairs properly and honorably, you must impart virtue to the citizens.
Of course.
But could one possibly impart a thing that one had not?
How, indeed?
Then you or anyone else who is to be governor and curator, not merely of himself and his belongings in private, but of the state and its affairs, must first acquire virtue himself.
That is true.
Hence it is not licence or authority for doing what one pleases that you have to secure to yourself or the state, but justice and temperance.
Apparently.
For you and the state, if you act justly and temperately, will act so as to please God.
Naturally.
And, as we were saying in what went before, you will act with your eyes turned on what is divine and bright.
Apparently.
Well, and looking thereon you will behold and know both yourselves and your good.
Yes.
And so you will act aright and well?
Yes.
Well now, if you act in this way, I am ready to warrant that you must be happy.
And I can rely on your warranty.
But if you act unjustly, with your eyes on the godless and dark, the probability is that your acts will resemble these through your ignorance of yourselves.
That is probable.
For if a man, my dear Alcibiades, is at liberty to do what he pleases, but is lacking in mind, what is the probable result to him personally, or to the state as well?
For instance, if he is sick and at liberty to do what he pleases without a medical mind, but with a despot's power which prevents anyone from even reproving him what will be the result?
Will not his health, in all likelihood, be shattered?
That is true.
Again, in a ship, if a man were at liberty to do what he chose, but were devoid of mind and excellence in navigation, do you perceive what must happen to him and his fellow-sailors?
I do: they must all perish.
And in just the same way, if a state, or any office or authority, is lacking in excellence or virtue, it will be overtaken by failure?
It must.
Then it is not despotic power, my admirable Alcibiades, that you ought to secure either to yourself or to the state, if you would be happy, but virtue.
That is true.
And before getting virtue, to be governed by a superior is better than to govern, for a man as well as a child.
Apparently.
And the better is also nobler?
Yes.
And the nobler more becoming?
Of course.
Then it becomes a bad man to be a slave, since it is better.
Yes.
So vice is a thing that becomes a slave.
Apparently.
And virtue becomes a free man.
Yes.
And we should shun, my good friend, all slavishness?
Most certainly, Socrates.
And do you now perceive how you stand?
Are you on the side of the free, or not?
I think I perceive only too clearly.
Then do you know how you may escape from the condition in which you now find yourself?
Let us not give it a name, where a handsome person is concerned!
I do.
How?
If it be your wish, .
That is not well said, Alcibiades.
Well, what should I say?
If it be God's will.
Then I say it.
And yet I say this besides, that we are like to make a change in our parts, Socrates, so that I shall have yours and you mine.
For from this day onward it must be the case that I am your attendant, and you have me always in attendance on you.
Ah, generous friend! So my love will be just like a stork; for after hatching a winged love in you it is to be cherished in return by its nestling.
Well, that is the position, and I shall begin here and now to take pains over justice.
I should like to think you will continue to do so; yet I am apprehensive, not from any distrust of your nature, but in view of the might of the state, lest it overcome both me and you.
Alcibiades, are you on your way to offer a prayer to the god.
Alcibiades
I am, certainly, Socrates.
Socrates
You seem, let me say, to have a gloomy look, and to keep your eyes on the ground, as though you were pondering something.
Alcibiades
And what might one ponder, Socrates.
Socrates
The greatest of questions, Alcibiades, as I believe.
For tell me, in Heaven's name, do you not think that the gods sometimes grant in part, but in part refuse, what we ask of them in our private and public prayers, and gratify some people, but not others.
Alcibiades
I do, certainly.
Socrates
Then you would agree that one should take great precautions against falling unawares into the error of praying for great evils in the belief that they are good, while the gods happen to be disposed to grant freely what one is praying for.
Just as Oedipus, they say, suddenly prayed that his sons might divide their patrimony with the sword: it was open to him to pray that his present evils might by some means be averted, but he invoked others in addition to those which he had already.
Wherefore not only were those words of his accomplished, but many other dread results therefrom, which I think there is no need to recount in detail.
Alcibiades
But you have instanced a madman, Socrates: why, do you suppose that anyone could bring himself, while he was in a sound state, to utter such a prayer.
Socrates
Do you regard madness as the opposite of wisdom.
Alcibiades
Certainly I do.
Socrates
And there are some men whom you regard as unwise, and others as wise.
Alcibiades
Why, yes.
Socrates
Come then, let us consider who these people are.
We have admitted that some are unwise, some wise, and others mad.
Alcibiades
Yes, we have.
Socrates
And again, there are some in sound health.
Alcibiades
There are.
Socrates
And others also who are in ill-health.
Alcibiades
Quite so.
Socrates
And they are not the same.
Alcibiades
No, indeed.
Socrates
And are there any others besides, who are found to be in neither state.
Alcibiades
No, to be sure.
Socrates
For a human being must needs be either sick or not sick.
Alcibiades
I agree.
Socrates
Well then, do you hold the same view about wisdom and unwisdom.
Alcibiades
How do you mean.
Socrates
Tell me, do you think it is only possible to be either wise or unwise, or is there some third condition between these, which makes a man neither wise nor unwise.
Alcibiades
No, there is not.
Socrates
So he must needs be in one or the other of these two conditions.
Alcibiades
I agree.
Socrates
And you remember that you admitted that madness is the opposite of wisdom.
Alcibiades
I do.
Socrates
And further, that there is no third condition between these, which makes a man neither wise nor unwise.
Alcibiades
Yes, I admitted that.
Socrates
Well now, can there possibly be two opposites of one thing.
Alcibiades
By no means.
Socrates
Then it looks as though unwisdom and madness were the same.
Alcibiades
Yes, apparently.
Socrates
So we shall be right, Alcibiades, in saying that all unwise persons are mad; for example, such of your contemporaries as happen to be unwise some such there are and of your elders, even:
for tell me, in Heaven's name, do you not think that in our city the wise people are but few, whereas the majority are unwise, and these you call mad.
Alcibiades
I do.
Socrates
Well, do you suppose we could safely live with so many madmen as our fellow-citizens, and should not long ago have paid the penalty for it in knocks and blows at their hands, and all the usual proceedings of madmen.
Consider now, my wonderful friend, whether the case is not quite different.
Alcibiades
Well, it must be, Socrates.
For it looks as though it were not as I thought.
Socrates
And I think so too.
But there is another way of regarding it.
Alcibiades
I wonder what way you mean.
Socrates
Well, I will tell you.
We conceive there are some who are sick, do we not.
Alcibiades
We do, to be sure.
Socrates
And do you believe that a sick man must necessarily have the gout, or a fever, or ophthalmia.
Do you not think that, although he may be afflicted in none of these ways, he may be suffering from some other disease.
For surely there are many of them: these are not the only ones.
Alcibiades
I agree.
Socrates
And is every ophthalmia, in your opinion, a disease.
Alcibiades
Yes.
Socrates
And is every disease also ophthalmia.
Alcibiades
No, I should think not: still, I am in doubt as to my meaning.
Socrates
Well, if you will attend to me, "two together" will be searching, and so mayhap we shall find what we seek.
Alcibiades
Nay, but I am attending, Socrates, to the best of my power.
Socrates
Then we have admitted that while every ophthalmia is a disease, every disease, on the other hand, is not ophthalmia.
Alcibiades
We have.
Socrates
And our admission seems to me quite right.
For everyone in a fever is sick, but yet not everyone who is sick has a fever or the gout or ophthalmia, I take it; though everything of the sort is a disease, but differs to quote those whom we call doctors in its manifestation.
For they are not all alike, nor of like effect, but each works according to its own faculty, and yet all are diseases.
In the same way, we conceive of some men as artisans, do we not.
Alcibiades
Certainly.
Socrates
That is, cobblers and carpenters and statuaries and a host of others, whom we need not mention in particular;
but any way, they have their several departments of craft, and all of them are craftsmen; yet they are not all carpenters or cobblers or statuaries, though these taken together are craftsmen.
Alcibiades
No, indeed.
Socrates
In the same way, then, have men divided unwisdom also among them, and those who have the largest share of it we call "mad," and those who have a little less, "dolts" and "idiots"; though people who prefer to use the mildest language term them sometimes "romantic," sometimes "simpleminded," or again "innocent," "inexperienced," or "obtuse"; and many another name will you find if you look for more.
But all these things are unwisdom, though they differ, as we observed that one art or one disease differs from another.
Or how does it strike you.
Alcibiades
That is my view.
Socrates
Then let us turn at this point and retrace our steps.
For we said, you know, at the beginning that we must consider who the unwise can be, and who the wise:
for we had admitted that there are such persons, had we not.
Alcibiades
Yes, we have admitted it.
Socrates
Then you conceive those to be wise who know what one ought to do and say.
Alcibiades
I do.
Socrates
And which are the unwise.
Those who know neither of these things.
Alcibiades
The same.
Socrates
And those who know neither of these things will say and do unawares what one ought not.
Alcibiades
Apparently.
Socrates
Well, just such a person, as I was saying, Alcibiades, was Oedipus; and even in our time you will find many who do the same, not in a fit of anger, as he was: they think they pray not for something evil, but for something good.
He neither prayed for that, nor thought he did, but there are others who are in the opposite case.
For I imagine that if the god to whom you are now going should appear to you and first ask you, before you made any prayer, whether you would be content to become sovereign of the Athenian state and, on your accounting this as something poor and unimportant, should add "and of all the Greeks also";
and if he saw you were still unsatisfied unless he promised you besides the mastery of all Europe, and should not merely promise you that, but on the self-same day a recognition by all men, if you so desired, of Alcibiades, son of Cleinias, as their sovereign
I imagine you would actually depart in a transport of delight, as having secured the greatest of goods.
Alcibiades
So would anybody else, I imagine, Socrates, at such a stroke of luck.
Socrates
But still you would not wish to sacrifice your life even for the territory and sovereignty of all the Greeks and barbarians together.
Alcibiades
I should think not.
How could I, without a prospect of making any use of them.
Socrates
And what if you had a prospect of making an evil and injurious use of them.
Not in this case either.
Alcibiades
No, indeed.
Socrates
So you see it is not safe either to accept casually what one is given, or to pray for one's own advancement, if one is going to be injured in consequence, or deprived of one's life altogether.
Yet we could tell of many ere now who, having desired sovereignty, and endeavored to secure it, with the idea of working for their good, have lost their lives by plots which their sovereignty has provoked.
And I expect you are not unacquainted with certain events "of a day or two ago," when Archelaus, the monarch of Macedonia, was slain by his favorite, who was as much in love with the monarchy as Archelaus was with him, and who killed his lover with the expectation of being not only the monarch, but also a happy man:
but after holding the monarchy for three or four days he was plotted against by others in his turn, and perished.
You have only to look at some of our own citizens and these are examples that we know, not by hearsay, but by personal observation who in their time have desired to hold military command and have obtained it, and see how some to this very day are exiles from our city, while others have lost their lives.
And even those who are deemed to be faring best have not only gone through many dangers and terrors in holding their command, but on returning home have continued to be as sorely besieged by informers as they were by the enemy, so that some of them wished to heaven that they had been anything but commanders rather than have held such appointments.
Of course, if these dangers and toils were conducive to our advantage, there would be some reason for them; but the case is quite the contrary.
And you will find it is just the same in regard to children: some people have been known to pray that they might have them, and when they have got them have fallen into the greatest disasters and pains.
For some have had children that were utterly bad, and have spent their whole lives in repining; while others, though they had good ones, were bereft of them by disasters that overtook them, and thus were cast into as great misfortune as the others, and wished that no children at all had been born to them.
But nevertheless, with all this plain evidence, and a great deal more of a similar kind, before men's eyes, it is rare to find anyone who has either declined what was offered to him or, when he was likely to gain something by prayer, refrained from praying.
Most men would not decline the offer of either a monarchy or a generalship or any of the various other things which bring with them harm rather than benefit, but would even pray to be granted them in cases where they were lacking: but after a little while they often change their tune, and retract all their former prayers.
I question therefore if men are not really wrong in blaming the gods as the authors of their ills, when "they themselves by their own presumption" or unwisdom, shall we say.
"have gotten them more than destined sorrows."
It would seem, at any rate, Alcibiades, that one old poet had some wisdom; for I conceive it was because he had some foolish friends, whom he saw working and praying for things that were not for their advantage, though supposed to be by them, that he made a common prayer on behalf of them all, in terms something like these:
"King Zeus, give unto us what is good, whether we pray or pray not;
But what is grievous, even if we pray for it, do thou avert."
So then, to my mind the poet spoke well and soundly; but if you have thought of an answer to his words, do not be silent.
Alcibiades
It is difficult, Socrates, to gainsay what has been well spoken: one thing, however, I do observe how many evils are caused to men by ignorance, when, as it seems, we are beguiled by her not only into doing, but worst of all into praying to be granted the greatest evils.
Now that is a thing that no one would suppose of himself; each of us would rather suppose he was competent to pray for his own greatest good, not his greatest evil.
Why, that would seem, in truth, more like some sort of curse than a prayer.
Socrates
But perhaps, my excellent friend, some person who is wiser than either you or I may say we are wrong to be so free with our abuse of ignorance, unless we can add that it is ignorance of certain things, and is a good to certain persons in certain conditions, as to those others it is an evil.
Alcibiades
How do you mean.
Can there be anything of which it is better for anybody, in any condition whatsoever, to be ignorant than cognizant.
Socrates
I believe so; and do not you.
Alcibiades
No, indeed, upon my word.
Socrates
But surely I shall not have to tax you with an inclination to commit such an act against your own mother as Orestes and Alcmaeon, and any others who have followed their example, are said to have committed against theirs.
Alcibiades
No unlucky words, in Heaven's name, Socrates.
Socrates
Why, it is not the person who says, Alcibiades, that you would not like to be guilty of such an act, whom you should bid avoid unlucky words, but much rather him who might say the contrary; since the act seems to you so very dreadful as to be unfit even for such casual mention.
But do you think that Orestes, if he had had all his wits about him and had known what was best for him to do, would have brought himself to commit any act of the sort.
Alcibiades
No, indeed.
Socrates
Nor would anyone else, I imagine.
Alcibiades
No.
Socrates
Then it seems that ignorance of what is best, and to be ignorant of the best, is a bad thing.
Alcibiades
I agree.
Socrates
And not only for the person himself, but for everyone else.
Alcibiades
Yes.
Socrates
Then let us consider this further case.
Suppose it should quite suddenly occur to your mind that you had better take a dagger and go to the door of Pericles, your own guardian and friend, and ask if he were at home, with the design of killing just him and no one else, and his servants said he was at home:
now, I do not say you would be inclined to do any such thing, but I suppose, if you are under the impression which at some moment may well be present, surely, to the mind of a man who is ignorant of the best that what is really the worst is best at some moment or do you not agree.
Alcibiades
Quite so.
Socrates
Well then, if you went indoors and saw Pericles himself, but did not know him, and thought he was somebody else, would you still venture to kill him.
Alcibiades
No, upon my word, I should think not.
Socrates
For your man was, I presume, not anyone you met, but that particular person whom you wished to kill.
Alcibiades
Yes.
Socrates
And although you might make a number of attempts, if you always failed to know Pericles when you were about to commit the act, you would never attack him.
Alcibiades
No, indeed.
Socrates
Well now, do you suppose that Orestes would ever have attacked his mother if he had similarly failed to know her.
Alcibiades
I do not think he would.
Socrates
For presumably he, too, had no intention of killing the first woman he met, or anybody else's mother, but only his own.
Alcibiades
That is so.
Socrates
Then to be ignorant in such matters is better for those who are so disposed and have formed such resolves.
Alcibiades
Apparently.
Socrates
So you see that ignorance of certain things is for certain persons in certain states a good, not an evil, as you supposed just now.
Alcibiades
It seems to be.
Socrates
Then if you care to consider the sequel of this, I daresay it will surprise you.
Alcibiades
What may that be, Socrates.
Socrates
I mean that, generally speaking, it rather looks as though the possession of the sciences as a whole, if it does not include possession of the science of the best, will in a few instances help, but in most will harm, the owner.
Consider it this way:
must it not be the case, in your opinion, that when we are about to do or say anything, we first suppose that we know, or do really know, the thing we so confidently intend to say or do.
Alcibiades
I think so.
Socrates
Well, take the orators, for example: they either know, or think they know, how to advise us on various occasions some about war and peace, and others about building walls or fitting up harbors; and in a word, whatever the city does to another city or within herself, all comes about by the advice of the orators.
Alcibiades
That is true.
Socrates
Then observe the consequence.
Alcibiades
If I am able.
Socrates
Why, surely you call men either wise or unwise.
Alcibiades
I do.
Socrates
And the many unwise, and the few wise.
Alcibiades
Precisely.
Socrates
And in either case you name them in reference to something.
Alcibiades
Yes.
Socrates
Then do you call a man wise who knows how to give advice, without knowing whether and when it is better to act upon it.
Alcibiades
No, indeed.
Socrates
Nor, I conceive, a man who knows what war is in itself, without knowing when or for how long a time it is better to make war.
Alcibiades
Agreed.
Socrates
Nor, again, a man who knows how to kill another, or seize his property, or make him an exile from his native land, without knowing when or to whom it is better so to behave.
Alcibiades
No, to be sure.
Socrates
Then it is a man who knows something of this sort, and is assisted by knowledge of what is best, and this is surely the same as knowledge of the useful, is it not.
Alcibiades
Yes.
Socrates
And we shall call him wise, and a competent adviser both of the city and of his own self; but a man not so qualified we shall call the opposite of these.
How do you think.
Alcibiades
I agree.
Socrates
And what of a man who knows how to ride or shoot, or else to box or wrestle or contend in any other sport, or do anything that we know by rule of art.
What do you call him who knows what is better done by rule of that particular art.
Do you not say that he who goes by the rules of riding is a good rider.
Alcibiades
I do.
Socrates
And the rules of boxing, I suppose, make a good boxer, and those of flute-playing a good flute-player, and so, on the same lines, I presume, with the rest; or is there any difference.
Alcibiades
No, it is as you say.
Socrates
Then do you think it inevitable that he who has some knowledge about these things should also be a wise man, or shall we say he comes far short of it.
Alcibiades
Far short of it, I declare.
Socrates
Then what sort of state do you suppose it would be, where the people were good bowmen and flute-players, together with athletes and artists in general, and mingled with these the men whom we have just mentioned as knowing war in itself and slaughter in itself, and orator-windbags too with their political bluster, but all of them lacked this knowledge of the best, and none knew when or upon whom it was better to employ their respective arts.
Alcibiades
A paltry one, I should call it, Socrates.
Socrates
Yes, you would, I expect, when you saw each one of them vying with the other and assigning the largest part in the conduct of the state to that "Wherein himself is found most excellent,"
I mean, what is done best by rule of his particular art while he is entirely off the track of what is best for the state and for himself, because, I conceive, he has put his trust in opinion apart from intelligence.
In these circumstances, should we not be right in saying that such a state is one great mass of turmoil and lawlessness.
Alcibiades
We should, upon my word.
Socrates
And we took it to be necessary that we should first think we know, or really know, anything that we confidently intend either to do or to say.
Alcibiades
We did.
Socrates
And if a man does what he knows or thinks he knows, and is assisted by knowing how to make it beneficial, we shall find him profitable both to the city and to himself.
Alcibiades
Certainly.
Socrates
But if, I suppose, he does the contrary, he will not be so either to the city or to himself.
Alcibiades
No, indeed.
Socrates
Well then, do you still take the same view now as before, or do you think differently.
Alcibiades
No, I take the same view.
Socrates
And you said you called the many unwise, and the few wise.
Alcibiades
I did.
Socrates
So now we repeat our statement that the many have missed getting the best because in most cases, I conceive, they have put their trust in opinion apart from intelligence.
Alcibiades
Yes.
Socrates
Then it is an advantage to the many neither to know nor to think they know anything, if they are going to be specially eager to do what they know or think they know, but are likely on the whole, in doing it, to be injured rather than benefited.
Alcibiades
That is very true.
Socrates
So you see that when I said it looked as though the possession of the sciences as a whole, where it did not include the science of the best, in a few cases helped, but in most harmed the owner, I was evidently right in very truth, was I not.
Alcibiades
Though I did not then, I think so now, Socrates.
Socrates
Hence the state or soul that is to live aright must hold fast to this knowledge, exactly as a sick man does to a doctor, or as he who would voyage safely does to a pilot.
For without this, the more briskly it is wafted by fortune either to the acquisition of wealth or to bodily strength or aught else of the sort, the greater will be the mistakes in which these things, it would seem, must needs involve it.
And he who has acquired the so-called mastery of learning and arts, but is destitute of this knowledge and impelled by this or that one among those others, is sure to meet with much rough weather, as he truly deserves; since, I imagine, he must continue without a pilot on the high seas, and has only the brief span of his life in which to run his course.
So that his case aptly fits the saying of the poet, in which he complains of somebody or other that "Full many crafts he knew: but still he knew them all so very ill."
Alcibiades
Why, how on earth is the poet's saying apposite, Socrates.
For to my mind it has nothing to do with the point.
Socrates
It is very much to the point: but he, good sir, like almost every other poet, speaks in riddles.
For poetry as a whole is by nature inclined to riddling, and it is not every man who can apprehend it.
And furthermore, besides having this natural tendency, when it gets hold of a grudging person who wishes not to show forth to us his own wisdom but to conceal it as much as possible, we find it an extraordinarily difficult matter to make out whatever this or that one of them may mean.
For surely you do not suppose that Homer, divinest and wisest of poets, did not know it was impossible to know ill; for it is he who says of Margites that he knew many things, but knew them all ill: but it is a riddle, I think, in which he has made "ill" stand for "evil," and "knew" for "to know."
So if we put it together, letting the meter go, indeed, but grasping his meaning, we get this: "Full many crafts he knew, but it was evil for him to know them all."
Then clearly, if it was evil for him to know many things, he was in fact a paltry fellow, assuming we are to believe what we have previously argued.
Alcibiades
But I think we may, Socrates: at least, if I cannot believe those arguments of ours, I shall find it hard to trust any others.
Socrates
And you are right in so thinking.
Alcibiades
I repeat that I think so.
Socrates
But come now, in Heaven's name for I suppose you see how great and strange is our perplexity, in which you, as it seems to me, have your share; for you change about from this side to that without settling down for a moment, but as soon as you are firmly convinced of a thing you seem to slip out of it again and cease to hold the same view well, if the god to whom you are going should even now appear to you and ask before you uttered any prayer, whether you would be content to obtain one of those things which were mentioned at the beginning, or whether he should leave you to pray as you were, how do you suppose you would make the best of your chance by accepting his offer, or by praying for something on your own account.
Alcibiades
Well, by the gods, I could not answer your question, Socrates, offhand.
Why, I take it to be a fatuous request, when it is really a case for great caution lest one pray unawares for what is evil while thinking it to be one's good, and then after a little while, as you were saying, one change one's tune and retract all one's former prayers.
Socrates
And did not the poet whom I quoted at the beginning of our discussion know more than we, when he bade us pray for the averting of what is grievous, even though we pray for it.
Alcibiades
I think so.
Socrates
Then it is their admiration of this poet, Alcibiades, or perhaps the result of their own study, that causes the Spartans to offer a similar prayer whether the occasion be private or public that the gods will give them for their own benefit the beautiful as well as the good: more than this no one can ever hear them pray for.
The consequence is that to the present time they have been just as fortunate as any other people; and if it has befallen them to be not invariably fortunate, it was anyhow not owing to their prayer.
It rests with the gods, I conceive, to give us either what we may pray for or the reverse.
And I would like to give you an account of something else, which I once heard from some of my seniors.
A quarrel having arisen between the Athenians and the Spartans, it befell our city to be always unsuccessful in every battle by land and sea, and she could never win a victory.
So the Athenians, in their annoyance at this result, and at a loss for some means of finding a deliverance from the trouble they were in, took counsel together and decided that the best thing they could do was to send and inquire of Ammon;
and moreover, to ask also for what reason the gods granted victory to the Spartans rather than to themselves: "for we" such was the message "offer up to them more and finer sacrifices than any of the Greeks, and have adorned their temples with votive emblems as no other people have done, and presented to the gods the costliest and stateliest processions year by year, and spent more money thus than all the rest of the Greeks together.
But the Spartans have never taken any such pains, and indeed are so neglectful in their behavior to the gods, that they make a practice of sacrificing defective victims, and generally are very much behind us in the honors that they pay, though the wealth they possess is quite equal to that of our city.
When they had so spoken, and added the question, what they should do in order to find a deliverance from the trouble they were in, the prophet's only answer evidently it was all that the god allowed was to call them to him and say: "Thus saith Ammon to the Athenians:
I would rather have the reverent reserve of the Spartans than all the ritual of the Greeks.
So much he said, and not a word further.
Now by "reverent reserve" I suppose the god could only mean their prayer, since in fact it differs greatly from those that are generally offered.
For the Greeks in general either lead up bulls with gilded horns, or else present the gods with votive emblems, and pray for any odd thing, whether it be good or bad: so when the gods hear their irreverent speech they reject all these costly processions and sacrifices.
Whereas I think we ought to be very cautious, and fully consider what is to be said and what is not.
And in Homer too you will find other tales of a similar sort.
For he relates how the Trojans, in making their bivouac,"Sacrificed to the immortals perfect hecatombs," and how the winds bore the sweet savour from the plain into heaven:"But the blessed gods partook not of it, nor would have it,
For deep was their hate against holy Ilium,
And Priam, and the folk of Priam of the good ashen spear.
So it was nothing to their purpose to sacrifice and pay tribute of gifts in vain, when they were hated by the gods.
For it is not, I imagine, the way of the gods to be seduced with gifts, like a base insurer.
And indeed it is but silly talk of ours, if we claim to surpass the Spartans on this score.
For it would be a strange thing if the gods had regard to our gifts and sacrifices instead of our souls, and the piety and justice that may be found in any of us.
Far rather at these, I believe, do they look than at those costly processions and sacrifices which are offered, it well may be, by individual and state, year in, year out, though they may have offended greatly against the gods, or as greatly against their neighbors.
But the gods are not to be won by bribes, and so they despise all these things, as Ammon and the holy prophet say.
Certainly it would seem that justice and wisdom are held in especial honor both by the gods and by men of intelligence; and wise and just are they alone who know what acts and words to use towards gods and men.
But I should like now to hear what may be your opinion on the subject.
Alcibiades
Why, Socrates, it in no wise differs from yours and the god's; for indeed it would not be fitting for me to record my vote against the god.
Socrates
And you remember you professed to be in great perplexity lest you should pray unawares for evil, while supposing it to be good.
Alcibiades
I do.
Socrates
You see, then, how unsafe it is for you to approach the god with your prayers, for it may chance that when he hears your irreverent speech he will reject your sacrifice altogether, and you may perhaps be accorded some other bad thing as well.
In my opinion, therefore, it is best to hold your peace: for I expect you will not consent to use the Spartan's prayer, you have such a romantic spirit to give it the fairest of folly's names.
It is necessary, therefore, to bide one's time until one can learn how one should behave towards gods and men.
Alcibiades
Well, when will that time arrive, Socrates, and who is to be my instructor.
For I feel I should very much like to see who the man is,
Socrates
It is he who is concerned about you.
But I think, as Homer relates how Athena removed the mist from the eyes of Diomede,"That be might well discern both god and man,
so you too must first have the mist removed which now enwraps your soul, and then you will be ready to receive the means whereby you will discern both evil and good.
For at present I do not think you could do so.
Alcibiades
Let him remove the mist or whatever else he likes to call it: for I am prepared to obey every one of his commands, without shirking, whoever the man may be, so long as I am to be the better for them.
Socrates
I tell you, he on his part is prodigiously anxious to help you.
Alcibiades
Then I think it best to defer the sacrifice also till the time comes.
Socrates
And you are quite right: for that is safer than running so serious a risk.
Alcibiades
But how say you, Socrates.
Look now, I will crown you with this garland, as I consider you have given me such good advice; and to the gods we shall offer both garlands and all the other customary things when I see that day has come.
And come it will ere long, if they are willing.
Socrates
Well, I accept this gift; and anything else besides, that you may give me, I shall be only too happy to accept.
And as Euripides has made Creon say when he sees Teiresias wearing his wreaths, and hears that he has obtained them, on account of his art, as first-fruits of the spoils of war:"As omen good I take thy victor's wreaths;
For in the waves we labour, as you know,
so do I take this opinion of yours as a good omen.
For I consider I am no less wave-tossed than Creon, and would like to come off victorious over your lovers.
Hipparchus
Socrates
Friend
Socrates
And what is love of gain.
What can it be, and who are the lovers of gain.
Friend
In my opinion, they are those who think it worth while to make gain out of things of no worth.
Socrates
Is it your opinion that they know those things to be of no worth, or do not know.
For if they do not know, you mean that the lovers of gain are fools.
Friend
No, I do not mean they are fools, but rascals who wickedly yield to gain, because they know that the things out of which they dare to make their gain are worthless, and yet they dare to be lovers of gain from mere shamelessness.
Socrates
Well now, do you mean by the lover of gain such a man, for instance, as a farmer who plants something which he knows is a worthless herb, and thinks fit to make gain out of it when he has reared it up.
Is that the sort of man you mean.
Friend
The lover of gain, as such, Socrates, thinks he ought to make gain from everything.
Socrates
Please do not speak so recklessly, as though you had been wronged by someone, but give me your attention and answer just as you would if I were beginning my questions over again.
Do you not admit that the lover of gain has knowledge of the worth of the thing from which he thinks it worth while to make gain.
Friend
I do.
Socrates
Then who has knowledge of the worth of plants, and of the sort of season and soil in which they are worth planting
if we too may throw in one of those artful phrases which adroit pleaders use to trick out their speeches in the law courts.
Friend
For my part, I should say a farmer.
Socrates
And by "think it worth while to make gain" do you mean aught but "thinking one ought to make gain".
Friend
I mean that.
Socrates
Then do not attempt to deceive me, who am now quite an elderly person, and you so young, by making, as you did just now, an answer that is not even your own thought; but tell me in all truth, do you suppose that any man who was taking up farming and who knew it was a worthless plant that he was planting, could think to make gain from it.
Friend
Upon my word, I do not.
Socrates
Or again, take a horseman who knows that he is providing worthless food for his horse; do you suppose he is unaware that he is destroying his horse.
Friend
I do not.
Socrates
So he does not think to make gain from that worthless food.
Friend
No.
Socrates
Or again, take a navigator who has furnished his ship with worthless spars and ropes; do you think he is unaware that he will suffer for it, and will be in danger of being lost himself, and of losing the ship and all her cargo.
Friend
I do not.
Socrates
So he does not think to make gain from that worthless tackle.
Friend
No, indeed.
Socrates
But does a general, who knows that his army has worthless arms, think to make gain, or think it worth while to make gain, from them.
Friend
By no means.
Socrates
Or does a flute-player who has worthless flutes, or a harper with a lyre, a bowman with a bow, or anyone else at all, in short, among ordinary craftsmen or sensible men in general, with any implement or other equipment of any sort that is worthless, think to make gain from it.
Friend
To all appearance, no.
Socrates
Then whoever can they be, your lovers of gain.
For I presume they are not the people whom we have successively mentioned, but people who know their worthless things, and yet think they are to make gain from them.
But in that case, by what you say, remarkable sir, no man alive is a lover of gain
Friend
Well, Socrates, I should like to call those lovers of gain who from insatiable greed consumedly long for things that are even quite petty and of little or no worth, and so love gain, in each case.
Socrates
Not knowing, of course, my excellent friend, that the things are worthless; for we have already convinced ourselves by our argument that this is impossible.
Friend
I agree.
Socrates
And if not knowing this, clearly they are ignorant of it, but think that those worthless things are worth a great deal.
Friend
Apparently.
Socrates
Now, of course lovers of gain must love gain.
Friend
Yes.
Socrates
And by gain you mean the opposite of loss.
Friend
I do.
Socrates
And is it a good thing for anyone to suffer loss.
Friend
For no one.
Socrates
Rather an evil.
Friend
Yes.
Socrates
So mankind are harmed by loss.
Friend
They are harmed.
Socrates
Then loss is an evil.
Friend
Yes.
Socrates
And gain is the opposite of loss.
Friend
The opposite.
Socrates
So that gain is a good.
Friend
Yes.
Socrates
Hence it is those who love the good that you call lovers of gain.
Friend
So it seems.
Socrates
At least there is nothing mad, my friend, about lovers of gain, as you describe them.
But tell me, do you yourself love, or not love, whatever is good.
Friend
I love it.
Socrates
And is there anything good that you do not love, or must it then be evil.
Friend
Upon my word, nothing.
Socrates
In fact, I expect you love all good things.
Friend
Yes.
Socrates
Well now, ask me on my side whether I do not likewise: for I shall agree with you, for my part, that I love good things.
But besides you and me, do you not think that all the rest of mankind love good things, and hate evil things.
Friend
It appears so to me.
Socrates
And we admitted that gain is good.
Friend
Yes.
Socrates
On this new showing, everyone appears to be a lover of gain; whereas, by our former way of arguing, no one was a lover of gain.
So on which of the two arguments are we to rely, in order to avoid error.
Friend
What has to be done, I think, Socrates, is to conceive the lover of gain rightly.
The right view of the lover of gain is that he is one who concerns himself with, and thinks fit to make gain from, things from which honest men do not dare to make gain.
Socrates
But you see, my sweet sir, we have just admitted that making gain is being benefited.
Friend
Well, what of that.
Socrates
There is the further point we have admitted in addition to this that all men wish for good things always.
Friend
Yes.
Socrates
Then good men likewise wish to have all gains, if these are good things.
Friend
Not those gains from which they are bound, Socrates, to suffer harm.
Socrates
By "suffer harm" do you mean "suffer loss," or something else.
Friend
No, I mean just "suffer loss."
Socrates
Well, do men suffer loss from gain or from loss.
Friend
From both; for they suffer loss from loss and from wicked gain.
Socrates
Pray now, do you consider that any useful and good thing is wicked.
Friend
I do not.
Socrates
And we admitted a little while ago that gain is the opposite of loss, which is an evil.
Friend
I agree.
Socrates
And that, being the opposite of an evil, it is good.
Friend
That was our admission.
Socrates
So you see, you are attempting to deceive me, for you deliberately contradict what we agreed to just now.
Friend
No, on my honor, Socrates; on the contrary, it is you who are deceiving me, by twisting this way and that so perplexingly in your talk.
Socrates
Hush, hush.
Why, surely it would be wrong of me not to obey a good and wise person.
Friend
Who is that.
And to what are you referring now.
Socrates
I mean my and your fellow-citizen, Pisistratus's son Hipparchus, of Philaidae, who was the eldest and wisest of Pisistratus's sons, and who, among the many goodly proofs of wisdom that he showed, first brought the poems of Homer into this country of ours, and compelled the rhapsodes at the Panathenaea to recite them in relay, one man following on another, as they still do now.
He dispatched a fifty-oared galley for Anacreon of Teos, and brought him into our city.
Simonides of Ceos he always had about him, prevailing on him by plenteous fees and gifts.
All this he did from a wish to educate the citizens, in order that he might have subjects of the highest excellence; for he thought it not right to grudge wisdom to any, so noble and good was he.
And when his people in the city had been educated and were admiring him for his wisdom, he proceeded next, with the design of educating those of the countryside, to set up figures of Hermes for them along the roads in the midst of the city and every district town;
and then, after selecting from his own wise lore, both learnt from others and discovered for himself, the things that he considered the wisest, he threw these into elegiac form and inscribed them on the figures as verses of his own and testimonies of his wisdom,
so that in the first place his people should not admire those wise Delphic legends of "Know thyself" and "Nothing overmuch", and the other sayings of the sort, but should rather regard as wise the utterances of Hipparchus;
and that in the second place, through passing up and down and reading his words and acquiring a taste for his wisdom, they might resort hither from the country for the completion of their education.
There are two such inscriptions of his:
on the left side of each Hermes there is one in which the god says that he stands in the midst of the city or the township, while on the right side he says:"The memorial of Hipparchus: walk with just intent.
There are many other fine inscriptions from his poems on other figures of Hermes, and this one in particular, on the Steiria road, in which he says: The memorial of Hipparchus: deceive not a friend.
I therefore should never dare, I am sure, to deceive you, who are my friend, or disobey the great Hipparchus, after whose death the Athenians were for three years under the despotic rule of his brother Hippias,
and you might have heard anyone of the earlier period say that it was only in these years that there was despotism in Athens, and that at all other times the Athenians lived very much as in the reign of Cronos.
And the subtler sort of people say that Hipparchus's death was due, not to the cause supposed by most the disqualification of the assassin's sister from bearing the basket, for that is a silly motive but because Harmodius had become the favorite of Aristogeiton and had been educated by him.
Thus Aristogeiton also prided himself on educating people, and he regarded Hipparchus as a dangerous rival.
And at that time, it is said, Harmodius happened to be himself in love with one of the handsome and well-born youths of the day;
they do tell his name, but I cannot remember it.
Well, for a while this youth admired both Harmodius and Aristogeiton as wise men, but afterwards, when he associated with Hipparchus, he despised them, and they were so overcome with the pain of this "disqualification" that they slew Hipparchus.
Friend
It would seem, then, Socrates, either that you do not regard me as your friend, or if you do, that you do not obey Hipparchus.
For that you are not deceiving me though I cannot tell how you contrive it in your talk, is more than I can believe.
Socrates
Well now, as though we were playing draughts, I am willing to let you revoke, as you please, anything you have said in carrying on the discussion, in order that you may not think you are being deceived.
So tell me, shall I revoke for you the statement that all men desire good things.
Friend
No, thank you.
Socrates
Well, that suffering loss, or loss, is an evil.
Friend
No, thank you.
Socrates
Well, that gain, or making gain, is the opposite of loss, or suffering loss.
Friend
Nor that either.
Socrates
Well, that making gain, as the opposite of evil, is a good.
Friend
Nothing of all this do I bid you revoke for me.
Socrates
You think, then, it seems, that some gain is good, and some evil.
Friend
I do.
Socrates
Well then, I revoke so much for you; so let us assume that some gain is good, and some other gain evil.
But the good sort is no more gain than the evil sort, is it.
Friend
What do you mean by this question.
Socrates
I will explain.
Is there both good and evil food.
Friend
Yes.
Socrates
And is the one sort more food than the other, or are they both similarly this same thing, food, and in this respect does the one differ no wise from the other, in being food, but only in the fact of the one being good and the other evil.
Friend
Yes.
Socrates
And so with drink and every other class of things that exist, when some things in any class come to be good, and others evil, one thing does not differ from another in that respect whereby they are the same.
For instance, one man, I suppose, is virtuous, and another wicked.
Friend
Yes.
Socrates
But neither of them, I conceive, is more or less man than the other neither the virtuous than the wicked, nor the wicked than the virtuous.
Friend
What you say is true.
Socrates
Then are we to take the same view of gain also, that both the wicked and the virtuous sort are similarly gain.
Friend
Necessarily.
Socrates
So he who has virtuous gain is no whit the more a gainer than he who has wicked gain: neither sort is found to be more gain, as we agree.
Friend
Yes.
Socrates
For neither of them has addition of either more or less.
Friend
No, indeed.
Socrates
And how could one do or suffer anything more or less with a thing of this sort, that had neither of these additions.
Friend
Impossible.
Socrates
Since, therefore, both of these are gains and gain-making affairs, we must now consider what it can be that leads you to call both of them gain: what is it that you see to be the same in both.
Suppose you were to ask me, in those instances that I gave just now, what it is that leads me to call both good food and evil food alike food, I should tell you for this reason, because both are a dry sustenance of the body.
For that, I am sure you would agree, is what food is, would you not.
Friend
I would.
Socrates
And so too about drink the answer would be on the same lines, that the wet sustenance of the body, whether it be wholesome or pernicious, has this name of drink; and likewise with the rest.
Try therefore on your part to imitate my method of answering.
When you say that virtuous gain and wicked gain are both gain, what is it that you see to be the same in them, judging it to be the actual element of gain.
And if again you are yourself unable to answer, just let me put it for your consideration, whether you describe as gain every acquisition that one has acquired either with no expense, or as a profit over and above one's expense.
Friend
I believe that is what I call gain.
Socrates
Do you include a case where, after enjoying a banquet at which one has had much good cheer without any expense, one acquires an illness.
Friend
Upon my word, not I.
Socrates
And if one acquired health from attending a banquet, would one acquire gain or loss.
Friend
Gain.
Socrates
Hence gain is not just acquiring any acquisition.
Friend
No, indeed.
Socrates
Do you mean, not if it is evil.
Or will one acquire no gain even if one acquires something good.
Friend
Apparently one will, if it is good.
Socrates
And if it is evil, will not one acquire loss.
Friend
I think so.
Socrates
You see, then, how you are running round again to the same old point.
Gain is found to be good, and loss evil.
Friend
For my part, I cannot tell what to say.
Socrates
And not without good reason, sir.
Now answer this further question: you say that if one acquires more than the amount one has spent, it is gain.
Friend
I do not mean, when it is evil, but if one gets more gold or silver than one has spent.
Socrates
Now, I am just going to ask you about that.
Tell me, if one spends half a pound of gold and gets double that weight in silver, has one got gain or loss.
Friend
Loss, I presume, Socrates for one's gold is reduced to twice, instead of twelve times, the value of silver.
Socrates
But you see, one has got more; or is double not more than half.
Friend
Not in worth, the one being silver and the other gold.
Socrates
So gain, it seems, must have this addition of worth.
At least, you now say that silver, though more than gold, is not worth as much, and that gold, though less, is of equal worth.
Friend
Assuredly, for that is the case.
Socrates
Then the valuable is what produces gain, whether it be small or great, and the valueless produces no gain.
Friend
Yes.
Socrates
And by the valuable you mean simply, valuable to possess.
Friend
Yes, to possess.
Socrates
And again, by what is valuable to possess, do you mean the unprofitable or the profitable.
Friend
The profitable, I presume.
Socrates
And the profitable is good.
Friend
Yes.
Socrates
And so, most valiant of men, have we not here once more, for the third or fourth time, the admission that what produces gain is good.
Friend
So it seems.
Socrates
Then do you remember the point from which this discussion of ours arose.
Friend
I think I do.
Socrates
In case you do not, I will remind you.
You maintained against me that good men do not wish to make all sorts of gain, but only those gains that are good, and not those that are wicked.
Friend
Yes.
Socrates
And now the argument has compelled us to acknowledge that all gains, both small and great, are good.
Friend
Yes, it has compelled me, at least, Socrates, rather than persuaded me.
Socrates
Well, later on, perhaps, it might also persuade you.
Now, however, whether you are persuaded or whatever is your feeling, you at least agree with me that all gains are good, both small and great ones.
Friend
Yes, I do admit it.
Socrates
And you admit that virtuous men all wish for all good things, do you not.
Friend
I do.
Socrates
But, you know, you stated yourself that wicked men love both small and great gains.
Friend
I did.
Socrates
And so, by your account, all men will be lovers of gain, whether they be virtuous or wicked.
Friend
Apparently.
Socrates
Hence it is not right to reproach anybody with being a lover of gain: for he who makes this reproach is actually such an one himself.
Lovers
Socrates
Socrates
I entered the grammar school of the teacher Dionysius, and saw there the young men who are accounted the most comely in form and of distinguished family, and their lovers.
Now it chanced that two of the young people were disputing, but about what, I did not clearly overhear:
it appeared, however, that they were disputing either about Anaxagoras or about Oenopides; at any rate, they appeared to be drawing circles, and they were imitating certain inclinations with their arms, bending to it and taking it most earnestly.
Then I for I was sitting beside the lover of one of the pair nudged him with my elbow and asked him what on earth the two youngsters were so earnest about, and I said: Is it then something great and fine, in which they are so earnestly immersed.
Great and fine, indeed he replied:
why, these fellows are prating about the heavenly bodies, and babbling philosophy.
Then I, surprised at his answer, said: Young man, do you consider philosophizing to be shameful.
Else, why do you speak so sharply.
Then the other youth for he chanced to be sitting near him, as his rival in love when he heard my question and his rival's answer, said:
You do yourself no good, Socrates, by pressing this fellow with a further question, as to whether he considers philosophizing to be shameful.
Do you not know that he has spent the whole of his life in practising the neckhold, and stuffing himself, and sleeping.
So why did you suppose he would make any other reply than that philosophy is shameful.
Now this one of the two lovers had spent his time on humane studies, whereas the other, whom he was abusing, had spent his on athletics.
So I decided that I had best relinquish the other, whom I had been questioning, since he did not even himself set up to be experienced in words, but only in deeds; and that I should interrogate the one who set up to be wiser, in order that so far as I was able I might get some benefit from him.
I said therefore: I addressed my question to both in common; but if you think you could answer more creditably than he, I put the same question to you as I did to him: do you consider philosophizing to be honorable or not.
Then the two striplings, overhearing us speak somewhat like this, were silent, and ceasing from their own contention they became listeners to ours.
What their lovers' sensations were, I do not know, but I myself, at any rate, was staggered; for every time I am staggered by handsome young people.
It seemed to me, however, that my young friend too was in as great a flutter as myself; but nevertheless he answered me in a most ambitious spirit:
Why, of course, Socrates, he said, if I should ever consider philosophizing to be shameful, I should not account myself so much as a man, nor anyone else either who was disposed to think so.
Here he pointed to his rival lover, and spoke with a loud voice, in order that his favorite might hear every word.
Then I remarked: So philosophizing seems to you to be honorable.
Quite so, he said.
Well now, I said; does it seem to you possible to know whether anything is honorable or shameful without knowing what it is fundamentally.
No, he said.
Then do you know, I went on, what philosophizing is.
Certainly I do, said he.
Then what is it.
I asked.
Why, just what Solon called it;
you know it was Solon who said: "And ever, as I older grow, I learn yet more and more;" and I agree with him that a man who intends to philosophize should in this way be ever learning something or other, whether he be younger or older, in order that he may learn as many things as possible in his life.
Now at first I felt there was something in his reply, but then, on second thoughts, I asked him whether he considered philosophy to be much learning.
To which he answered: Certainly.
And do you consider philosophy to be merely honorable, I asked, or good as well.
Good as well, he said: very much so.
Then do you observe this as peculiar to philosophy, or do you find it similarly in everything else.
For example, do you consider the love of athletics to be not merely honorable, but good as well,
or do you not.
Whereupon he, most slily, gave a double answer: To him my statement must be "neither" ; but to you, Socrates, I acknowledge it to be both honorable and good: for I consider this the right view.
Then I asked him: Well now, in athletics, do you consider that much exercise is love of athletics.
To which he replied: Certainly, just as in philosophizing I consider much learning to be philosophy.
Then I said: And do you then consider that the lovers of athletics desire anything else than that which will cause them to be in good bodily condition.
Only that, he replied.
And does much exercise, I asked, cause them to be in good bodily condition.
Yes, for how, he replied, could one be in good bodily condition through little exercise.
Here I felt it was time to stir up the lover of athletics, in order that he might give me the support of his athletic experience; so I proceeded to ask him: And you then, pray, why are you silent, excellent sir, while your friend here is speaking thus.
Do you agree that men are in good bodily condition through much exercise, or is it rather through moderate exercise.
For my part, Socrates, he said, I thought even a pig as the saying is would have known that moderate exercise causes them to be in good bodily condition, so why should not a fellow who is sleepless and unfed, with unchafed neck and slender, care-worn frame.
And when he had said this the boys were delighted and laughed their approval, while the other lover blushed.
Then I said to him:
Well, do you now concede that it is neither much, nor little, but moderate exercise that causes men to be in good bodily condition.
Or do you bid defiance to the two of us on this point.
To which he answered: Against him I should be only too glad to fight it out, and I am certain I should prove able to support the theory I have put forward, even had I put forward a weaker one; for he is naught.
But with you I do not aim at winning an unscrupulous success; and so I admit that not a great but a moderate amount of athletics causes good condition in men.
And what of food.
Moderate or much.
I asked.
The same applied to food, he admitted.
Then I went on and tried to compel him also to admit that everything else connected with the body when most beneficial, was the moderate thing, not the much or the little; and he admitted that it was the moderate thing.
And now, I said, as regards the soul;
are moderate or immoderate things beneficial, as adjuncts of it.
Moderate things, he replied.
And are studies among the adjuncts of the soul.
He admitted they were.
So among these also it is the moderate that are beneficial, and not the much.
He agreed.
Then whom should we be justified in asking what sort of exercise or food is moderate for the body.
The three of us agreed that it must be a doctor or a trainer.
And whom should we ask about the moderate measure in the sowing of seed.
In that matter, we agreed, it must be a farmer.
And whom should we be justified in asking as to the moderate degree and kind, in regard to the sowing and planting of studies in the soul.
At this point we all began to be full of perplexity; then I, mocking at them, asked: Do you mind, since we are in perplexity, if we ask these boys here.
or perhaps we are ashamed, as Homer said the suitors were, and do not think it fit there should be someone else who will string the bow.
Then, as it seemed to me that they were losing their zeal for the argument, I tried to pursue the inquiry in another way, and said: But what, as nearly as we can guess, are the kinds of learning which the philosopher should learn, since he is not to learn all things or many things.
At this the wiser one interjected: The finest and most suitable kinds of learning are those which will bring him the most reputation for philosophy; and he will get most reputation if he appears well versed in all the arts, or if not in all, in as many of them, and those the most considerable, as he can, by learning so much of them as befits a free man to learn, that is, what belongs to the understanding rather than the handiwork of each.
Well now, do you mean, I asked, in the same way as in carpentry.
For there, you know, you can buy a carpenter for five or six minae, but a first-rate architect cannot be got for even ten thousand drachmae; few such, indeed, could be found throughout the whole of Greece.
Is it something of this sort that you mean.
When he heard me say this, he admitted that something like this was what he himself meant.
I next asked him if it was not impossible for the same person to learn in this way merely two of the arts, not to speak of many or the principal ones; to which he replied: Do not conceive me, Socrates, to be stating that the philosopher must have accurate knowledge of each of the arts, like the actual adept in any of them; I mean only so far as may be expected of a free and educated man: that is, he should be able to follow the explanations of the craftsman more readily than the rest of the company, and to contribute an opinion of his own which will make him appear the cleverest and most accomplished of the company who may at any time be present at some verbal or practical exposition of the arts.
Then, as I was still unsettled in my mind as to the drift of his words, I asked him: Do I quite grasp the sort of man whom you mean by the philosopher.
For you seem to me to mean someone like the all-round athletes in contest with the runners or the wrestlers:
the former yield, you know, to the latter in their particular exercises, and are their inferiors in these, but are superior to the usual sort of athletes and beat them.
I daresay it may be something of this sort that you would suggest as the effect produced by philosophy on those who make it their pursuit: they yield to those who are first-rate in an understanding of the arts, but in taking the second place they surpass the rest; and in this way the man who has studied philosophy comes just next to the top in everything.
That is the kind of person whom you appear to me to indicate.
You are quite right, it seems to me, Socrates, he said, in your conception of the philosopher's position, with your comparison of him to the all-round athlete.
For it is precisely his nature not to be enslaved to any business, or to work out anything exactly, so as to let his application to that one matter make him deficient in the rest, as the craftsmen do, but to have a moderate contact with all of them.
Well, after this answer I was eager to know clearly what he meant, so I inquired of him whether he conceived of good men as useful or useless.
Useful, I should say, Socrates, he replied.
Then if good men are useful, are wicked men useless.
He agreed that they were.
Again, do you consider that philosophers are useful persons or not.
He agreed that they were useful; nay, more, that he considered they were most useful of all.
Come now, let us make out, if what you say is true, where these second-best men are also useful to us:
for clearly the philosopher is inferior to any particular adept in the arts.
He agreed.
Well now, I went on, if you yourself, or one of your friends for whom you feel great concern, should have fallen sick, would you fetch that second-best man into the house with a view to obtaining health, or would you summon a doctor.
For my part, I should have both, he replied.
Please do not say "both," I said, but which of the two you would prefer and also summon first.
No one, he replied,would make any question but that the doctor should be preferred and also summoned first.
And again, if you were in a ship that was making rough weather, to which would you rather entrust yourself and yours, the pilot or the philosopher.
I should choose the pilot.
And so it will be in everything else: so long as there is some craftsman, the philosopher will not be useful.
Apparently, he replied.
So now we find that the philosopher is a useless person.
For I suppose we always have craftsmen; and we have agreed that good men are useful, and bad ones useless.
He was obliged to agree to this.
Then what follows.
Am I to ask you, or will it be too ill-mannered.
Ask whatever you please.
Well, my aim, I said, is merely to recall our agreements upon what has been stated.
The matter stands somewhat like this.
We agreed that philosophy is an honorable thing, and that philosophers are good; and that good men are useful, and wicked men useless: but then again we agreed that philosophers, so long as we have craftsmen, are useless, and that we always do have craftsmen.
Has not all this been agreed.
Yes, to be sure, he replied.
Then we agreed, it seems, by your account if philosophizing means having knowledge of the arts in the way you describe that philosophers are wicked and useless so long as there are arts among mankind.
But I expect they are not so really, my friend, and that philosophizing is not just having a concernment in the arts or spending one's life in meddlesome stooping and prying and accumulation of learning, but something else; because I imagined that this life was actually a disgrace, and that people who concerned themselves with the arts were called sordid.
But we shall know more definitely whether this statement of mine is true, if you will answer me this: What men know how to punish horses rightly.
Is it those who make them into the best horses, or some other men.
Those who make them into the best horses.
Or again, is it not the men who know how to make dogs into the best dogs that know also how to punish them rightly.
Yes.
Then it is the same art that makes them into the best dogs and punishes them rightly.
It appears so to me, he replied.
Again, is the art that makes them into the best ones and punishes them rightly the same as that which knows the good and the bad ones, or is it some other.
The same, he said.
Then in the case of men also will you be prepared to agree that the art which makes them into the best men is that which punishes them rightly and distinguishes the good and the bad ones.
Certainly, he said.
And that which does this to one, does it also to many, and that which does it to many, does it also to one.
Yes.
And so it is also with horses and everything else.
I agree.
Then what is the knowledge which rightly punishes the licentious and law-breaking people in our cities.
Is it not judicature.
Yes.
And is it any other art than this that you call justice.
No, only this.
And that whereby they punish rightly is that whereby they know the good and bad people.
It is.
And whoever knows one will know many also.
Yes.
And whoever does not know many will not know one.
I agree.
Then if one were a horse, and did not know the good and wicked horses, would one not know which sort one was oneself.
I think not.
And if one were an ox and did not know the wicked and good oxen, would one not know which sort one was oneself.
That is so, he said.
And so it would be, if one were a dog.
He agreed.
Well now, when one is a man, and does not know the good and bad men, one surely cannot know whether one is good or wicked oneself, since one is a man also oneself.
He granted this.
And is "not knowing oneself" being temperate, or not being temperate.
Not being temperate.
So "knowing oneself" is being temperate.
I agree, he said.
So this is the message, it seems, of the Delphic inscription that one is to practise temperance and justice.
It seems so.
And it is by this same art that we know also how to punish rightly.
Yes.
Then that whereby we know how to punish rightly is justice, and that whereby we know how to distinguish our own and others' quality is temperance.
It seems so, he said.
Then justice and temperance are the same thing.
Apparently.
And further, it is thus, you know, that cities are well ordered when the wrongdoers pay the penalty.
That is true, he said.
Hence this is also statecraft.
He concurred.
Again, when one man governs a city rightly, is he not called a despot and king.
I agree.
And he governs by a kingly and despotic art.
That is so.
And these arts are the same as the former.
Apparently.
Again, when a man singly governs a house aright, what is he called.
Is he not a house-manager and master.
Yes.
Then would he also govern his house well by justice, or by some other art.
By justice.
Hence they are all the same, it seems, king, despot, statesman, house-manager, master, and the temperate man and the just man;
and it is all one art, the kingly, the despotic, the statesman's, the master's, the house-manager's, and justice and temperance.
It is so, apparently, he said.
Then, if it is disgraceful in the philosopher to be unable, when a doctor speaks about the sick, either to follow his remarks or to contribute anything of his own to what is being said or done, and to be in the same case when any other of the craftsmen speaks, is it not disgraceful that he should be unable, when it is a judge or a king or some other of the persons whom we have just instanced, either to follow their words or contribute anything to their business.
It must indeed be disgraceful, Socrates, to have nothing to contribute to subjects of such great importance.
Are we then to say, I asked, that in these matters also he is to be an all-round athlete, a second-rate man, taking the second place in all the subjects of this art he, the philosopher and is to be useless so long as there is one of these persons; or that, first of all, he is to entrust his own house to nobody else and is not to take the second place in it, but is himself to judge and punish rightly, if his house is to be well managed.
He granted me that it must be so.
Secondly, I presume, whether his friends entrust him with an arbitration, or the state charges him to determine or judge any matter, it is disgraceful for him, my good friend, in such cases, to be found in the second or third place, and not to lead.
I agree.
Hence we see, my excellent sir, that philosophizing is very far from being much learning and that affair of busying oneself with the arts.
On my saying this the cultivated youth was silent, feeling ashamed for what he had said before, while the unlearned one said it was as I stated; and the rest of the company praised the argument.
Demodocus
Socrates, I was wanting to have some private talk with you, if you had time to spare; even if there is some demand, which is not particularly important, on your time, do spare some, nevertheless, for me.
Socrates
Why, in any case I happen to have time to spare, and for you, moreover, I have plenty.
Well, you are free to say whatever you wish.
Demodocus
Then do you mind if we step aside here from the street into the portico of Zeus the Liberator.
Socrates
As you think best.
Demodocus
Let us go, then.
Socrates, it would seem that all growths follow the same course, both those that grow from the earth, and the animals, including man.
In regard to the plants, as you know, we who cultivate the earth find it the easiest part of our work to make all our preparations that are needed before planting, and to do the planting itself; but when the plant begins to grow, thenceforward we have a great deal of difficult and vexatious business in tending the new growth.
Such, it seems, is also the case in regard to men: I take my own concerns as evidence for judging of the rest.
For indeed I have found the planting, or the procreation whichever one ought to call it of this son of mine the easiest thing in the world; but his upbringing has been vexatious and a constant source of alarm, so great are my fears for him.
Among the many instances that I could mention, the desire which occupies him at the moment is a thing that especially alarms me: for it is not an ill-bred desire, but a dangerous one, since here we have him, Socrates, as he says, desiring to become wise.
My opinion is that some of his fellow-townsmen, about his own age, who pay visits to the city, excite him with accounts of certain discussions they have heard there; and in his envy of these he has long been pestering me with the demand that I should take due thought for his needs, and pay fees to some sophist or other who will make him wise.
Now I do not mind so much about the fees, but I believe he is running into no slight danger where he is hastening.
I did for a time restrain him with good advice; but since I am no longer able to do so, I believe my best course is to comply with his request, in order that he may not resort, perchance, behind my back to somebody who will corrupt him.
So I have come now on this very business of placing this youth with one of these sophists, or purveyors of wisdom, as they are held to be.
It is a happy chance, therefore, that has thrown you in our way, as I should be particularly glad, with this plan of action in my mind, to ask your advice.
Come, if you have any advice to give on what you have heard from me, you not only may, but should, give it.
Socrates
Well, you know, Demodocus, they do say that advice is a holy thing.
And so, if ever it is to be accounted holy, it must be in this instance, in which you now seek it.
For there is no more divine matter on which a mortal could take counsel than the education either of himself or of his relations.
Now, first of all, let you and me come to an agreement as to what we suppose that this thing can be, on which we are taking counsel; for it may happen that I conceive it to be one thing, and you another, and then when we have proceeded some little way in our conference, we may perceive how ridiculous we are, I the adviser and you the advised, in having no common ground in our notions.
Demodocus
Why, I think you are right there, Socrates, and we should do as you suggest.
Socrates
Yes, I am right, but yet not entirely, because I have a slight change to make.
For it occurs to me that this youngster may not be desiring the thing that we suppose him to desire, but something else, and there again we may be still more absurdly taking counsel on some other thing.
Hence our most proper course, it seems to me, is to begin with the youth himself, and inquire of him what it actually is that he desires.
Demodocus
It does rather look, in fact, as though our best way would be thus, as you suggest.
Socrates
Then tell me, what is the young person's goodly name:
how are we to address him.
Demodocus
Theages is his name, Socrates.
Socrates
Goodly is the name, Demodocus, and holy-sounding, that you have bestowed on your son.
Tell me, then, Theages, do you say you desire to become wise, and do you require your father here to find out a school of some man who is qualified to make you wise.
Theages
Yes.
Socrates
And which sort of man do you call wise, those who have knowledge of such and such a thing, whatever it may be, or those who have not.
Theages
Those who have knowledge, I say.
Socrates
Well now, has not your father taught and educated you in the subjects which form the education of everyone else here all the sons of noble and honorable fathers in letters, I mean, and harping and wrestling and the other sorts of contest.
Theages
Yes, he has.
Socrates
And you think you are still lacking in some knowledge which it behoves your father to provide for you.
Theages
I do
Socrates
What knowledge is it.
Tell us on our side, that we may oblige you.
Theages
He knows it, as well as I, Socrates, since I have often told him; only he says this to you of set purpose, making as if he did not know what I desire.
For he assails me too with other statements of the same sort, and refuses to place me with any instructor.
Socrates
Well, what you said to him before was spoken, as it were, without witnesses; but now you shall take me as a witness, and declare before me what is this wisdom that you desire.
Come now; suppose you desired the wisdom whereby men steer a ship, and I happened to put this further question to you: Theages, what wisdom is it that you lack, when you blame your father for refusing to place you with people who would enable you to become wise.
What answer would you have given me.
What wisdom would you name.
The steersman's art, would you not.
Theages
Yes.
Socrates
And if a desire to be wise in the wisdom whereby they steer chariots led you to blame your father, and I asked what wisdom this was, what would you name in reply.
The charioteer's art, would you not.
Theages
Yes.
Socrates
And is that which you happen to be desiring now a nameless one, or has it a name.
Theages
I should say it has a name.
Socrates
Now do you know it, though not its name, or do you know its name as well.
Theages
I know its name as well.
Socrates
Then what is it.
Tell me.
Theages
What other name, Socrates, can one give it but wisdom.
Socrates
And the driver's art too is wisdom.
Or do you think it is ignorance.
Theages
I do not.
Socrates
You call it wisdom.
Theages
Yes.
Socrates
What use do we make of it.
Is it not the art whereby we know how to govern a team of horses.
Theages
Yes.
Socrates
And the steersman's art too is wisdom.
Theages
I think so.
Socrates
Is not this the art whereby we know how to govern ships.
Theages
Yes, it is.
Socrates
And the wisdom that you so desire, what is it.
That whereby we know how to govern whom.
Theages
To govern men, I imagine.
Socrates
Sick men, do you mean.
Theages
Oh, no.
Socrates
For that is medicine, is it not.
Theages
Yes.
Socrates
Well, that whereby we know how to govern the singers in a chorus.
Theages
No.
Socrates
For that is music.
Theages
To be sure.
Socrates
Well, that whereby we know how to govern men in gymnastic training.
Theages
No.
Socrates
For that is gymnastics.
Theages
Yes.
Socrates
Well, to govern people who do what.
Endeavor your best to speak, as I did to you at the beginning.
Theages
To govern the people in the city, I imagine.
Socrates
And are the sick people also in the city.
Theages
Yes, but I mean not these only, but all the rest who are in the city besides.
Socrates
Do I understand what art it is that you mean.
For you strike me as meaning, not that whereby we know how to govern reapers and harvesters and planters and sowers and threshers, for it is the farmer's art whereby we govern these, is it not.
Theages
Yes.
Socrates
Nor, I suppose, do you mean that whereby we know how to govern sawyers and borers and planers and turners, as a class together; for is not that carpentry.
Theages
Yes.
Socrates
But perhaps it is that whereby we govern, not only all these, but farmers themselves also, and carpenters, and all craftsmen and ordinary people, whether men or women: that, perhaps, is the wisdom you mean.
Theages
That, Socrates, is what I have been intending to mean all the time.
Socrates
Then can you tell me whether Aegisthus, who slew Agamemnon in Argos, governed all these people that you mean craftsmen and ordinary people, both men and women, or some other persons.
Theages
No, just those.
Socrates
Well now, did not Peleus, son of Aeacus, govern these same people in Phthia.
Theages
Yes.
Socrates
And have you ever heard of Periander, son of Cypselus, and how he governed at Corinth.
Theages
I have.
Socrates
Did he not govern these same people in his city.
Theages
Yes.
Socrates
Or again, do you not consider that Archelaus, son of Perdiccas, who governed recently in Macedonia, governed these same people.
Theages
I do.
Socrates
And who do you think were governed by Hippias, son of Peisistratus, who governed in this city.
Were they not these people .
Theages
To be sure they were.
Socrates
Now, can you tell me what appellation is given to Bacis and Sibyl and our native Amphilytus.
Theages
Why, soothsayers, of course, Socrates.
Socrates
That is correct.
But try to answer me in that way regarding those others Hippias and Periander: what appellation is given them on account of their government.
Theages
Despots, I suppose; it must be that.
Socrates
And when a man desires to govern the whole of the people in his city, he desires the same government as those did despotism, and to be a despot.
Theages
Apparently.
Socrates
And it is this that you say you desire.
Theages
It seems so, from what I have said.
Socrates
You scoundrel.
So you were desiring to govern us, all the time that you were blaming your father for not sending you to some seminary of despots.
And you, Demodocus, are you not ashamed of having known all the time what he is desiring, and though you could have sent him where you would have made him an expert in the wisdom which he desires, actually grudging it to him and refusing to send him.
But now, look here, as he has declared against you in my presence, shall you and I consult together on the question of whose school we shall send him to, and whose classes will help him to become a wise despot.
Demodocus
Yes, in faith, Socrates, let us certainly consult, as I feel this is a matter on which no slight counsel is needed.
Socrates
By and by, my good sir.
Let us first cross-examine him thoroughly.
Demodocus
Examine him then.
Socrates
Well now, what if we called in Euripides to our aid, Theages.
For you know Euripides says: "Despots are wise by converse with the wise.
Now, if someone should ask Euripides: Euripides, in what are these men wise, by whose converse you say that despots are wise.
I mean, suppose he had said: Farmers are wise by converse with the wise, and we had asked him, Wise in what.
what answer would he have given us.
Surely none other than, In farming.
Theages
That, and none other.
Socrates
Or again, if he had said:"Piemen are wise by converse with the wise,
"and we had asked him, Wise in what.
what answer would he have given us.
He would have said, In the pie-making business, would he not.
Theages
Yes.
Socrates
Or again, if he had said"Wrestlers are wise by converse with the wise,
"and we had asked him, Wise in what.
would he not reply, In wrestling.
Theages
Yes.
Socrates
But as he said:"Despots are wise by converse with the wise,
and we ask him, In what do you mean that the latter are wise, Euripides.
what will he reply.
What sort of subjects will he mention here.
Theages
Why, upon my word, I for my part do not know.
Socrates
Well, do you mind if I tell you.
Theages
If you do not mind.
Socrates
They are the same subjects that Anacreon said Callicrite understood; or do you not know the ode.
Theages
I do.
Socrates
Well then, do you desire to partake in some instruction of that sort from any man who is a fellow-craftsman of Callicrite, daughter of Cyane, and knows all about despotism as she did, according to the poet, in order that you may become a despot over us and our city.
Theages
You are joking all this time, Socrates, and making fun of me.
Socrates
Why, do you not say that you desire that wisdom which will enable you to govern all the citizens.
And in doing that, will you be anything else but a despot .
Theages
I should indeed pray, I imagine, that I might become a despot, if possible, over all men, and failing that, over as many as might be; so would you, I imagine, and everybody else besides: nay, even more, I daresay, that I might become a god; but I did not say I desired that.
Socrates
Well, what on earth then is it that you do desire.
Do you not say you desire to govern the citizens.
Theages
Yes, but not by force, or as despots do, but with their consent, as is done by all the other men of importance in the state.
Socrates
Do you mean, as by Themistocles and Pericles and Cimon, and by all those who have shown themselves able statesmen.
Theages
Yes, in good earnest, I mean those people.
Socrates
Then what if you chanced to desire to become wise in horsemanship.
To whom would you have had to resort before expecting to be a clever horseman.
To whom else but the horse-masters.
Theages
To none else, I am sure.
Socrates
And moreover, you would go to the actual men who are clever at the business, and who have horses and constantly use them in great numbers, both their own and other people's.
Theages
Obviously I should.
Socrates
And what if you wished to become wise in javelin-throwing.
Would you not expect to get this wisdom by having resorted to those javelin-masters who have javelins and who constantly use javelins, both other people's and their own, in great numbers.
Theages
I think so.
Socrates
Then pray tell me, since it is your wish to become wise in state-matters, do you expect to get your wisdom by resorting to any other persons than those statesmen, who not only have their own ability in state-matters, but have constant dealings with other cities besides their own, by their intercourse alike with Greek cities and with foreign peoples.
Or do you think to get wisdom in their business by resorting to any other persons than these particular men.
Theages
Well, Socrates, I have heard of the argument that you are said to put forward that the sons of those statesmen are no better men than the sons of shoemakers; and in my opinion your words are very true, from what I am able to gather.
Hence I should be an utter fool if I supposed that any of these men would impart his wisdom to me when he never was of any use to his own son, as he would have been, if he were able to be of use in this matter to anyone at all in the world.
Socrates
Then which way, most excellent sir, would you turn if, when you came to have a son, he should trouble you in the same manner, and tell you he desired to become a good painter, and should blame you, his father, for refusing to spend money on him for that very purpose, but at the same time should disregard the practitioners of that very thing, the painters, and decline to learn from them.
Or the flute-players, when he wished to become a flute-player, or the harp-players.
Would you know what to do with him, and where else you should send him if he refused to learn from these.
Theages
Upon my word, I should not.
Socrates
And do you now, when you are behaving in just the same way to your father, feel surprised and blame him for being at a loss what to do with you and where to send you.
Why, we are ready to place you with any well-bred Athenian statesman you may choose, who will train you free of charge; and so not only will you be at no expense of money, but will gain far greater commendation amongst the mass of men than if you studied with anyone else.
Theages
But then, Socrates, are not you too one of our well-bred gentlemen.
Indeed, if you will agree to instruct me, I am content and seek no other.
Socrates
What do you mean by that, Theages.
Demodocus
Nay, Socrates, there is nothing amiss in what he says, and you will oblige me at the same time; for I should count it the greatest possible stroke of luck if he should welcome your instruction and you also should consent to instruct him.
Nay, indeed, I am quite ashamed to say how keenly I wish it;
but I entreat you both you, to consent to teach Theages, and you, to seek the teaching of no one else than Socrates; you will thus relieve me of a harassing load of anxiety.
For just now I am sorely afraid of his falling in with some other person who is likely to corrupt him.
Theages
Have no more fears for me now, father, so long as you are able to persuade him to receive me as his pupil.
Demodocus
Very rightly spoken.
Socrates, from now onward we must address ourselves to you; for I am ready, in short, to place both myself and all that I hold dearest of what is mine in your hands whatever you may require, absolutely if you will open your arms to Theages here, and do him any service that you can.
Socrates
Demodocus, your zeal is no wonder to me, if you suppose that I especially could be of use to him; for I know of nothing for which a sensible man could be more zealous than for his own son's utmost improvement.
But how you came to form this opinion, that I would be better able to be of use to your son in his aim of becoming a good citizen than you would yourself, and how he came to suppose that I rather than yourself would be of use to him this does fill me with wonder.
For you, in the first place, are my elder, and further, you have held in your time many of the highest offices in Athens, and are respected by the people of Anagyrus above all your fellow-townsmen, and by the whole state as much as any man, whereas neither of you can notice anything like this about me.
And moreover, if Theages here does despise the instruction of our statesmen, and is looking for some other persons who profess to be able to educate young people,
we have here Prodicus of Ceos, Gorgias of Leontini, Polus of Acragas, and many more, who are so wise that they go to our cities and persuade the noblest and wealthiest of our young men who have the choice of learning from any citizen they choose, free of charge they persuade them to abandon that instruction and learn from them, with a deposit, besides, of a large sum of money as their fee, and to feel thankful in addition.
Some of these persons might naturally have been chosen both by your son and by yourself, in preference to me; for I have no knowledge of those fair and beatific subjects of study: I only wish that I had.
But what I always say, you know, is that I am in the position of knowing practically nothing except one little subject, that of love-matters.
In this subject, however, I claim to be skilled above anybody who has ever lived or is now living in the world.
Theages
Do you see, father.
Socrates does not seem to me to be at all willing now to spend his time on me; for there is readiness enough on my part, if he is willing.
But he is only jesting in what he has just told us.
For I know of some of my equals in age, and some a little older, who were of no account before they learnt from him, but after beginning to learn from him have in a very short time proved themselves superior to all whose inferiors they were before.
Socrates
And do you know what the meaning of it is, son of Demodocus.
Theages
Yes, on my soul, I do that, if it be your pleasure, I too shall be able to become such as those others are.
Socrates
No, good sir, the meaning of it escapes you; but I will tell it you.
There is something spiritual which, by a divine dispensation, has accompanied me from my childhood up.
It is a voice that, when it occurs, always indicates to me a prohibition of something I may be about to do, but never urges me on to anything; and if one of my friends consults me and the voice occurs, the same thing happens: it prohibits, and does not allow him to act.
And I will produce witnesses to convince you of these facts.
You know our Charmides here, who has grown so handsome, the son of Glaucon: he once happened to be consulting me on his intention of training for the Nemean races, and he had no sooner begun to say that he intended to train than the voice occurred, and I tried to prevent him, saying "Just as you were speaking my spirit-voice has occurred: no, you must not train.
""Perhaps," said he, "it indicates to you that I shall not win; but even if I am not to win, at any rate the exercise I shall get in the meantime will do me good.
"So saying, he went and trained; and so you may as well inquire of him as to the results he got from his training.
Or if you like, ask Cleitomachus, brother of Timarchus, what Timarchus said to him when he was going straight to the prison to meet his death, he and Euathlus the racing runner, who had harbored Timarchus as a fugitive; for he will tell you that the words he spoke to him were these:
Theages
What.
Socrates
"Cleitomachus," he said, "I tell you I am going to my death now, because I would not take Socrates' advice.
"Now, why on earth did Timarchus say that.
I will tell you.
When Timarchus and Philemon, son of Philemonides, got up from the wine-party to kill Nicias, son of Heroscamandrus, those two alone had knowledge of the plot; and Timarchus, as he got up, said to me: "What say you, Socrates.
Go on drinking, all of you; I have to get up and go somewhere, but I will join you a little later, if I get the chance.
"Then occurred that voice of mine, and I said to him: "No, no, do not get up; for my accustomed spiritual sign has occurred to me.
"So he stopped.
Then after an interval of time he again started to go, and said: "Well, I am going, Socrates.
"Again the voice occurred, and so again I constrained him to stop.
The third time, wishing to give me the slip, he got up without saying another word to me; he gave me the slip by watching until my attention was turned elsewhere.
Thus it was that he went right off and committed the deed which was the cause of his going then to his death.
And hence it was that he spoke those words to his brother which I quoted to you just now, that he was going to his death because he had not taken my advice.
And moreover, in regard to the Sicilian business, many will tell you what I said about the destruction of the army.
As to bygones, you may hear from those who know: but there is an opportunity now of testing the worth of what the sign says.
For as the handsome Sannio was setting out on campaign, the sign occurred to me, and he has gone now with Thrasyllus on an expedition bound for Ephesus and Ionia.
I accordingly expect him to be either killed or brought very near it, and I have great fears for our force as a whole.
Now I have told you all this, because this spiritual power that attends me also exerts itself to the full in my intercourse with those who spend their time with me.
To many, indeed, it is adverse, and it is not possible for these to get any good by conversing with me, and I am therefore unable to spend my time in conversing with them.
And there are many with whom it does not prohibit my intercourse, yet the intercourse does them no good.
But those who are assisted in their intercourse by that spiritual power are the persons whom you have noticed; for they make rapid progress there and then.
And of these, again, who make progress some find the benefit both solid and enduring; while there are many who, for as long a time as they are with me, make wonderful progress, but when they are parted from me relapse, and are no different from anybody else.
This once befell Aristeides, son of Lysimachus, son of Aristeides.
For by conversing with me he had made immense progress in a little time; and then he had to go on an expedition, and he went and sailed away.
On his return he found that Thucydides, son of Melesias, son of Thucydides, had been conversing with me.
Now Thucydides, the day before, had quarrelled with me over some arguments we had had.
So when Aristeides saw me, after greeting me and talking of other affairs, he said: "But Thucydides, I hear, Socrates, is somewhat on his dignity with you, and is annoyed as though he were somebody.
"Yes, that is so," I replied.
"Well, but does he not know," he said, "what a sad slave he was, before he associated with you.
""It seems not," I replied, "upon my soul.
""But indeed I myself also," he said, "am in a ridiculous position, Socrates.
""How exactly.
"I asked.
"Because," he replied, "before I sailed away, I was able to discuss things with anybody, and show myself inferior to none in argument, so that I even sought out the debates of the most accomplished people: but now, on the contrary, I shun them, wherever I notice there is anyone of education, so ashamed I am of my own ineptitude.
""Tell me," I said, "did this power forsake you of a sudden, or little by little.
""Little by little," he replied.
"And when it was present with you," I asked, "was it present through your having learnt something from me, or in some other way.
""I will tell you, Socrates," he said, "what is incredible, upon my soul, yet true.
For I never yet learnt anything from you, as you know yourself:
but I made progress, whenever I was with you, if I was merely in the same house, without being in the same room, but more progress, when I was in the same room.
And it seemed to me to be much more when I was in the same room and looked at you as you were speaking, than when I turned my eyes elsewhere: but my progress was far the greatest and most marked whenever I sat beside you and held and touched you.
Now, however," he said, "that condition has all oozed away.
Such then, Theages, is the intercourse you would have with me: if God so wills, you will make very great and rapid progress, but otherwise, you will not.
Consider, therefore, if it is not safer for you to be educated by one of those persons who have command themselves of the benefit which they bestow on mankind, rather than follow the course on which you may chance with me.
Theages
Well then, I decide, Socrates, that our plan shall be to make trial of that spiritual sign by associating with each other.
Thus, if it leaves us free, that will be best of all; if it does not, it will be time then for us to consider, at the moment, what we shall do whether we shall associate with someone else, or try to conciliate the divine sign itself that occurs to you with prayers and sacrifices and anything else that the seers may indicate.
Demodocus
In view of this, Socrates, say no more in opposition to the lad; for Theages is right in what he says.
Socrates
Well, if you consider that this is what we ought to do, let us do it.
Socrates
We arrived yesterday evening from the army at Potidaea, and I sought with delight, after an absence of some time, my wonted conversations.
Accordingly I went into the wrestling-school of Taureas, opposite the Queen's shrine, and there I came upon quite a number of people, some of whom were unknown to me, but most of whom I knew.
And as soon as they saw me appear thus unexpectedly, they hailed me from a distance on every side; but Chaerephon, like the mad creature that he is, jumped up from their midst and ran to me, and grasping me by the hand Socrates, he said, how did you survive the battle.
(Shortly before we came away there had been a battle at Potidaea, of which the people here had only just had news.
In the state in which you see me, I replied.
It has been reported here, you know, said he, that the battle was very severe, and that many of our acquaintance have lost their lives in it.
Then the report, I replied, is pretty near the truth.
You were present, he asked, at the fighting.
I was present.
Then sit down here, he said, and give us a full account; for as yet we have had no clear report of it all.
And with that he led me to a seat by Critias, son of Callaeschrus.
So I sat down there and greeted Critias and the rest, and gave them all the news from the battlefield, in answer to their various questions; each had his inquiry to make.
When we had had enough of such matters, I in my turn began to inquire about affairs at home, how philosophy was doing at present, and whether any of the rising young men had distinguished themselves for wisdom or beauty or both.
Then Critias, looking towards the door, for he saw some young fellows who were coming in with some railing at each other, and a crowd of people following on behind them, said Concerning the beauties, Socrates, I expect you will get your knowledge at once: for these who are coming in are in fact forerunners and lovers of the person who is held, for the moment at least, to be the greatest beauty; and he himself, I imagine, must by now be nearly upon us.
Who is he, I asked, and whose son.
You must know, he replied, but he was not yet grown up when you went away, Charmides, son of our uncle Glaucon, and my cousin.
I do know, to be sure, I said; for he was not to be despised even then, when he was still a child, and now, I suppose, he will be quite a youth by this time.
You will know this moment, he said, both how much and to what purpose he has grown.
And just as he spoke these words, Charmides entered.
Now I, my good friend, am no measurer: I am a mere "white line" in measuring beautiful people, for almost everyone who has just grown up appears beautiful to me.
Nay and this time, moreover, the young man appeared to me a marvel of stature and beauty; and all the rest, to my thinking, were in love with him, such was their astonishment and confusion when he came in, and a number of other lovers were following in his train.
On the part of men like us it was not so surprising; but when I came to observe the boys I noticed that none of them, not even the smallest, had eyes for anything else, but that they all gazed at him as if he were a statue.
Then Chaerephon called me and said How does the youth strike you, Socrates.
Has he not a fine face.
Immensely so, I replied.
Yet if he would consent to strip, he said, you would think he had no face, he has such perfect beauty of form.
And these words of Chaerephon were repeated by the rest.
Then, By Heracles.
I said, what an irresistible person you make him out to be, if he has but one more thing a little thing besides.
What.
said Critias.
If in his soul, I replied, he is of good grain.
And I should think, Critias, he ought to be, since he is of your house.
Ah, he said, he is right fair and good in that way also.
Why then, I said, let us strip that very part of him and view it first, instead of his form;
for anyhow, at that age, I am sure he is quite ready to have a discussion.
Very much so, said Critias; for, I may say, he is in fact a philosopher, and also as others besides himself consider quite a poet.
That, my dear Critias, I said, is a gift which your family has had a long while back, through your kinship with Solon.
But why not call the young man here and show him to me.
For surely, even if he were younger still, there could be no discredit in our having a talk with him before you, who are at once his guardian and his cousin.
You are quite right he said, and we will call him.
Thereupon he said to his attendant, Boy, call Charmides; tell him I want him to see a doctor about the ailment with which he told me he was troubled yesterday.
Then, turning to me, You know, he has spoken lately of having a headache, said Critias, on getting up in the morning: now why should you not represent to him that you know a cure for headache.
Why not I said: only he must come.
Oh, he will be here, he said.
And so it was;
for he came, and caused much laughter, because each of us who were seated made room for him by pushing hard at his neighbor so as to have him sitting beside himself, until at either end of the seat one had to stand up, and we tumbled the other off sideways;
and he came and sat down between me and Critias.
But here, my friend, I began to feel perplexed, and my former confidence in looking forward to a quite easy time in talking with him had been knocked out of me.
And when, on Critias telling him that it was I who knew the cure, he gave me such a look with his eyes as passes description, and was just about to plunge into a question, and when all the people in the wrestling-school surged round about us on every side then, ah then, my noble friend, I saw inside his cloak and caught fire, and could possess myself no longer; and I thought none was so wise in love-matters as Cydias, who in speaking of a beautiful boy recommends someone to "beware of coming as a fawn before the lion, and being seized as his portion of flesh"; for I too felt I had fallen a prey to some such creature.
However, when he had asked me if I knew the cure for headache, I somehow contrived to answer that I knew.
Then what is it he asked.
So I told him that the thing itself was a certain leaf, but there was a charm to go with the remedy; and if one uttered the charm at the moment of its application, the remedy made one perfectly well; but without the charm there was no efficacy in the leaf.
Then I will take down the charm, said he, from you in writing.
Do you prefer, I asked, to get my consent first, or to do without it.
This made him laugh, and he said: To get your consent, Socrates.
Very well, I said; and are you certain of my name.
Unless I misjudge, he replied; for there is no little talk of you among the set of our age, and I remember as a mere child the sight of you in company with Critias here.
That is a good thing, I said: for I shall speak more freely to you about the charm, and its real nature; just now I was at a loss for the way to apprise you of its power.
For it is of such a nature, Charmides, that it cannot cure the head alone; I daresay you have yourself sometimes heard good doctors say, you know, when a patient comes to them with a pain in his eyes, that it is not possible for them to attempt a cure of his eyes alone, but that it is necessary to treat his head too at the same time, if he is to have his eyes in good order; and so again, that to expect ever to treat the head by itself, apart from the body as a whole, is utter folly.
And on this principle they apply their regimen to the whole body, and attempt to treat and heal the part along with the whole; or have you not observed that this is what they say, and is done in fact.
Certainly I have, he said.
And you consider it well said, and accept the principle.
Most assuredly, he said.
Then I, on hearing his approval, regained my courage; and little by little I began to muster up my confidence again, and my spirit began to rekindle.
So I said, Such, then, Charmides, is the nature of this charm.
I learnt it on campaign over there, from one of the Thracian physicians of Zalmoxis, who are said even to make one immortal.
This Thracian said that the Greeks were right in advising as I told you just now: "but Zalmoxis," he said, "our king, who is a god, says that as you ought not to attempt to cure eyes without head, or head without body, so you should not treat body without soul"; and this was the reason why most maladies evaded the physicians of Greece that they neglected the whole, on which they ought to spend their pains, for if this were out of order it was impossible for the part to be in order.
For all that was good and evil, he said, in the body and in man altogether was sprung from the soul, and flowed along from thence as it did from the head into the eyes.
Wherefore that part was to be treated first and foremost, if all was to be well with the head and the rest of the body.
And the treatment of the soul, so he said, my wonderful friend, is by means of certain charms, and these charms are words of the right sort: by the use of such words is temperance engendered in our souls, and as soon as it is engendered and present we may easily secure health to the head and to the rest of the body also.
Now in teaching me the remedy and the charms he remarked, " Let nobody persuade you to treat his head with this remedy, unless he has first submitted his soul for you to treat with the charm.
For at present," he said, "the cure of mankind is beset with the error of certain doctors who attempt to practise the one method without the other."
And he most particularly enjoined on me not to let anyone, however wealthy or noble or handsome, induce me to disobey him.
So I, since I have given him my oath, and must obey him, will do as he bids; and if you agree to submit your soul first to the effect of the Thracian charms, according to the stranger's injunctions, I will apply the remedy to your head: otherwise we shall be at a loss what to do with you, my dear Charmides.
Then Critias, when he heard me say this, remarked, This affection of the head, Socrates, will turn out to be a stroke of luck for the young man, if he is to be compelled on account of his head to improve his understanding also.
However, let me tell you, Charmides is considered to excel his comrades not only in appearance, but also in that very thing which you say is produced by your charm: temperance, you say it is, do you not.
Certainly, I replied.
Then be assured, he said, that he is considered to be far and away the most temperate person now alive, while in every other respect, for a youth of his age, he is second to none.
Why, yes, I said, and it is only right, Charmides, that you should excel the rest in all these respects; for I do not suppose there is anyone else here who could readily point to a case of any two Athenian houses uniting together which would be likely to produce handsomer or nobler offspring than those from which you are sprung.
For your father's house, which comes from Critias, son of Dropides, has been celebrated by Anacreon and Solon and many other poets, so that it is famed by tradition among us as preeminent in beauty and virtue and all else that is accounted happiness; and then, your mother's house is famous in the same way, for of Pyrilampes, your uncle, it is said that no one in all the continent was considered to be his superior in beauty or stature, whenever he came as envoy to the great king or anyone else in Asia, and his house as a whole is no whit inferior to the other.
Sprung from such people, it is to be supposed that you would be first in all things.
And indeed, as regards your visible form, dear son of Glaucon, I consider that nowhere have you fallen behind any of your ancestors.
But if your nature is really rich in temperance and those other things, as our friend here says, blessed is the son, dear Charmides, I exclaimed, that your mother has borne in you.
However, the case stands thus:
if you already possess temperance, as Critias here declares, and you are sufficiently temperate, then you never had any need of the charms of Zalmoxis or of Abaris the Hyperborean, and might well be given at once the remedy for the head; but if you prove to be still lacking that virtue, we must apply the charm before the remedy.
So tell me yourself whether you agree with our friend, and can say that you are already sufficiently provided with temperance, or are deficient in it.
At this Charmides blushed and, for one thing, looked more beautiful then ever, for his modesty became his years; and then, too, he answered most ingenuously, saying it was no easy matter at the moment either to admit or to deny the words of the question.
For if, he went on, I say I am not temperate, not only is it a strange thing to say against oneself, but I shall at the same time be taxing with untruth both Critias and many others who consider me to be temperate, as he gives out; while if, on the other hand, I say I am, and praise myself, it will probably be found distasteful;
so that I cannot see what answer I am to give you.
Then I said: Your answer is a natural one, in my opinion, Charmides;
and I think, I went on, that we must join in inquiring whether you possess the thing I am asking after, or not, in order that neither you may be forced to say what you do not wish, nor I on my part may recklessly try my hand at medicine.
So if it is agreeable to you, I am ready to inquire with you; but, if it is not, to let it alone.
Why, nothing, he said, could be more agreeable to me : so far as that goes, therefore, inquire in whatever way you think we had better proceed.
Then this is the way, I said, in which I consider that our inquiry into this matter had best be conducted.
Now, it is clear that, if you have temperance with you, you can hold an opinion about it.
For being in you, I presume it must, in that case, afford some perception from which you can form some opinion of what temperance is, and what kind of thing it is : do you not think so .
I do, he replied.
And since you understand the Greek tongue, I said, you can tell me, I suppose, your view of this particular thought of yours.
I daresay, he said.
Then in order that we may make a guess whether it is in you or not, tell me, I said, what you say of temperance according to your opinion.
He at first hung back, and was not at all willing to answer: but presently he said that, to his mind, temperance was doing everything orderly and quietly walking in the streets, talking, and doing everything else of that kind;
and in a word, he said, I think the thing about which you ask may be called quietness.
Well, I said, are you right there.
They do say, you know, Charmides, that quiet people are temperate : so let us see if there is anything in what they say.
Tell me, is not temperance, however, among the honorable things.
To be sure, he said.
Well, which is most honorable at the writing master's, to write the same sort of letters quickly or quietly.
Quickly.
And in reading, to do it quickly or slowly.
Quickly.
And so, in the same way, to play the lyre quickly, or to wrestle nimbly, is far more honorable than to do it quietly and slowly.
Yes.
And what of boxing, alone or combined with wrestling.
Is it not the same there too.
To be sure.
And in running and leaping and all activities of the body, are not nimble and quick movements accounted honorable, while sluggish and quiet ones are deemed disgraceful.
Apparently.
So we find, I said, that in the body, at least, it is not quietness, but the greatest quickness and nimbleness that is most honorable, do we not.
Certainly.
And temperance was an honorable thing.
Yes.
Then in the body, at least, it is not quietness but quickness that will be the more temperate thing, since temperance is honorable.
So it seems, he said.
Well now, I went on; in learning, is facility the more honorable, or difficulty.
Facility.
And facility in learning, I said, is learning quickly, and difficulty in learning is learning quietly and slowly.
Yes.
And is it not more honorable to teach another quickly and forcibly, rather than quietly and slowly.
Yes.
Well now, is it more honorable to be reminded and to remember quietly and slowly, or forcibly and quickly.
Forcibly, he replied, and quickly.
And is not readiness of mind a sort of nimbleness of the soul, not a quietness.
True.
And to apprehend what is said, whether at the writing-master's or the lyre-master's or anywhere else, not as quietly as possible, but as quickly, is most honorable.
Yes.
Well, and in the searchings of the soul, and in deliberation, it is not the quietest person, I imagine, or he who deliberates and discovers with difficulty, that is held worthy of praise, but he who does this most easily and quickly.
That is so, he said.
Then in all, I said, Charmides, that concerns either our soul or our body, actions of quickness and nimbleness are found to be more honorable than those of slowness and quietness.
It looks like it, he said.
So temperance cannot be a sort of quietness, nor can the temperate life be quiet, by this argument at least; since, being temperate, it must be honorable.
For we have these two alternatives: either in no cases, or I should think in very few, can we find that the quiet actions in life are more honorable than the quick and vigorous ones; or at all events, my friend, if of the more honorable actions there are absolutely as many quiet ones as forcible and quick, not even so will temperance be acting quietly any more than acting forcibly and quickly, either in walking or in talking or in any other sphere; nor will the quiet life be more temperate than the unquiet; since in our argument we assumed that temperance is an honorable thing, and have found that quick things are just as honorable as quiet things.
Your statement, he said, Socrates, seems to me to be correct.
Once more then, I went on, Charmides, attend more closely and look into yourself; reflect on the quality that is given you by the presence of temperance, and what quality it must have to work this effect on you.
Take stock of all this and tell me, like a good, brave fellow, what it appears to you to be.
He paused a little, and after a quite manly effort of self-examination: Well, I think, he said, that temperance makes men ashamed or bashful, and that temperance is the same as modesty.
Well now, I asked, did you not admit a moment ago that temperance is honorable.
Certainly I did, he said.
And temperate men are also good.
Yes.
Well, can that be good which does not produce good men.
No, indeed.
And we conclude that it is not only honorable, but good also.
I think so.
Well then, I said, are you not convinced that Homer is right in saying "Modesty, no good mate for a needy man."
I am, he said.
Then it would seem that modesty is not good, and good.
Apparently.
But temperance is good, if its presence makes men good, and not bad.
It certainly seems to me to be as you say.
So temperance cannot be modesty, if it is in fact good, while modesty is no more good than evil.
Why, I think, he said, Socrates, that is correctly stated; but there is another view of temperance on which I would like to have your opinion.
I remembered just now what I once heard someone say, that temperance might be doing one's own business.
I ask you, then, do you think he is right in saying this.
You rascal, I said, you have heard it from Critias here, or some other of our wise men.
Seemingly, said Critias, from some other; for indeed he did not from me.
But what does it matter, Socrates, said Charmides, from whom I heard it.
Not at all, I replied; for in any case we have not to consider who said it, but whether it is a true saying or no.
Now you speak rightly, he said.
Yes, on my word, I said:
but I shall be surprised if we can find out how it stands; for it looks like a kind of riddle.
Why so.
he asked.
Because, I replied, presumably the speaker of the words "temperance is doing one's own business" did not mean them quite as he spoke them.
Or do you consider that the scribe does nothing when he writes or reads.
I rather consider that he does something, he replied.
And does the scribe, in your opinion, write and read his own name only, and teach you boys to do the same with yours.
Or did you write your enemies' names just as much as your own and your friends'.
Just as much.
Well, were you meddlesome or intemperate in doing this.
Not at all.
And you know you were not doing your own business, if writing and reading are doing something.
Why, so they are.
And indeed medical work, my good friend, and building and weaving and producing anything whatever that is the work of any art, I presume is doing something.
Certainly.
Well then, I went on, do you think a state would be well conducted under a law which enjoined that everyone should weave and scour his own coat, and make his own shoes, and his own flask and scraper, and everything else on the same principle of not touching the affairs of others but performing and doing his own for himself.
I think not, he replied.
But still, I said, a state whose conduct is temperate will be well conducted.
Of course, he said.
Then doing one's own business in that sense and in that way will not be temperance.
Apparently not.
So that person was riddling, it seems, just as I said a moment ago, when he said that doing one's own business is temperance.
For I take it he was not such a fool as all that: or was it some idiot that you heard saying this, Charmides.
Far from it, he replied, for indeed he seemed to be very wise.
Then it is perfectly certain, in my opinion, that he propounded it as a riddle, in view of the difficulty of understanding what "doing one's own business" can mean.
I daresay, he said.
Well, what can it mean, this "doing one's own business".
Can you tell me.
I do not know, upon my word, he replied: but I daresay it may be that not even he who said it knew in the least what he meant.
And as he said this he gave a sly laugh and glanced at Critias.
Now Critias for some time had been plainly burning with anxiety to distinguish himself in the eyes of Charmides and the company, and having with difficulty restrained himself heretofore, he now could do so no longer;
for I believe that what I had supposed was perfectly true that Charmides had heard this answer about temperance from Critias.
And so Charmides, wishing him to make answer instead of himself, sought to stir him up in particular, and pointed out that he himself had been refuted; but Critias rebelled against it, and seemed to me to have got angry with him, as a poet does with an actor who mishandles his verses on the stage:
so he looked hard at him and said: Do you really suppose, Charmides, that if you do not know what can have been the meaning of the man who said that temperance was doing one's own business, he did not know either.
Why, my excellent Critias, I said, no wonder if our friend, at his age, cannot understand; but you, I should think, may be expected to know, in view of your years and your studies.
So if you concede that temperance is what he says, and you accept the statement, for my part I would greatly prefer to have you as partner in the inquiry as to whether this saying is true or not.
Well, I quite concede it, he said, and accept it.
That is good, then, I said.
Now tell me, do you also concede what I was asking just now that all craftsmen make something.
I do.
And do you consider that they make their own things only, or those of others also.
Those of others also.
And are they temperate in not making their own things only.
Yes: what reason is there against it.
he said.
None for me, I replied; but there may be for him who, after assuming that temperance is doing one's own business, proceeds to say there is no reason against those also who do others' business being temperate.
And have I, pray, he said, admitted that those who do others' business are temperate.
Or was my admission of those who make things.
Tell me, I said, do you not call making and doing the same.
No indeed, he replied, nor working and making the same either: this I learnt from Hesiod, who said, "Work is no reproach."
Now, do you suppose that if he had given the names of working and doing to such works as you were mentioning just now, he would have said there was no reproach in shoe-making or pickle-selling or serving the stews.
It is not to be thought, Socrates; he rather held, I conceive, that making was different from doing and working, and that while a thing made might be a reproach if it had no connection with the honorable, work could never be a reproach.
For things honorably and usefully made he called works, and such makings he called workings and doings; and we must suppose that it was only such things as these that he called our proper concerns, but all that was harmful, the concerns of others.
So that we must conclude that Hesiod, and anyone else of good sense, calls him temperate who does his own business.
Ah, Critias, I said, you had hardly begun, when I grasped the purport of your speech that you called one's proper and one's own things good, and that the makings of the good you called doings; for in fact I have heard Prodicus drawing innumerable distinctions between names.
Well, I will allow you any application of a name that you please; only make clear to what thing it is that you attach such-and-such a name.
So begin now over again, and define more plainly.
Do you say that this doing or making, or whatever is the term you prefer, of good things, is temperance.
I do, he replied.
Then not he who does evil, but he who does good, is temperate.
And do not you, my excellent friend, he said, think so.
Leave that aside, I said; for we have not to consider yet what I think, but what you say now.
Well, all the same, I say, he replied, that he who does evil instead of good is not temperate, whereas he who does good instead of evil is temperate : for I give you "the doing of good things is temperance" as my plain definition.
And there is no reason, I daresay, why your statement should not be right; but still I wonder, I went on, whether you judge that temperate men are ignorant of their temperance.
No, I do not, he said.
A little while ago, I said, were you not saying that there was no reason why craftsmen should not be temperate in making others' things as well.
Yes, I was, he said, but what of it .
Nothing; only tell me whether you think that a doctor, in making someone healthy, makes a helpful result both for himself and for the person whom he cures.
I do.
And he who does this does his duty.
Yes.
Is not he who does his duty temperate.
Indeed he is.
Well, and must the doctor know when his medicine will be helpful, and when not.
And must every craftsman know when he is likely to be benefited by the work he does, and when not.
Probably not.
Then sometimes, I went on, the doctor may have done what is helpful or harmful without knowing the effect of his own action; and yet, in doing what was helpful, by your statement, he has done temperately.
Or did you not state that.
I did.
Then it would seem that in doing what is helpful he may sometimes do temperately and be temperate, but be ignorant of his own temperance.
But that, he said, Socrates, could never be: if you think this in any way a necessary inference from my previous admissions, I would rather withdraw some of them, and not be ashamed to say my statements were wrong, than concede at any time that a man who is ignorant of himself is temperate.
For I would almost say that this very thing, self-knowledge, is temperance, and I am at one with him who put up the inscription of those words at Delphi.
For the purpose of that inscription on the temple, as it seems to me, is to serve as the god's salutation to those who enter it, instead of "Hail." this is a wrong form of greeting, and they should rather exhort one another with the words, "Be temperate."
And thus the god addresses those who are entering his temple in a mode which differs from that of men; such was the intention of the dedicator of the inscription in putting it up, I believe; and that he says to each man who enters, in reality, "Be temperate."
But he says it in a rather riddling fashion, as a prophet would; for "Know thyself" and "Be temperate" are the same, as the inscription and I declare, though one is likely enough to think them different an error into which I consider the dedicators of the later inscriptions fell when they put up "Nothing overmuch" and "A pledge, and thereupon perdition."
For they supposed that "Know thyself" was a piece of advice, and not the god's salutation of those who were entering; and so, in order that their dedications too might equally give pieces of useful advice, they wrote these words and dedicated them.
Now my object in saying all this, Socrates, is to abandon to you all the previous argument for, though perhaps it was you who were more in the right, or perhaps it was I, yet nothing at all certain emerged from our statements and to proceed instead to satisfy you of this truth, if you do not admit it, that temperance is knowing oneself.
Why, Critias, I said, you treat me as though I professed to know the things on which I ask questions, and needed only the will to agree with you.
But the fact of the matter is rather that I join you in the inquiry, each time that a proposition is made, because I myself do not know; I wish therefore to consider first, before I tell you whether I agree or not.
Now, give me a moment to consider.
Consider then, he said.
Yes, and I am considering, I said.
For if temperance is knowing anything, obviously it must be a kind of science, and a science of something, must it not.
It is, he replied, and of itself.
And medicine, I said, is a science of health.
Certainly.
Then if you should ask me, I said, wherein medicine, as a science of health, is useful to us, and what it produces, I should say it is of very great benefit, since it produces health; an excellent result, if you allow so much.
I allow it.
And so, if you should ask me what result I take to be produced by building, as the builder's science, I should say houses; and it would be the same with the other arts.
Now it is for you, in your turn, to find an answer to a question regarding temperance since you say it is a science of self, Critias and to tell me what excellent result it produces for us, as science of self, and what it does that is worthy of its name.
Come now, tell me.
But, Socrates, he said, you are not inquiring rightly.
For in its nature it is not like the other sciences, any more than any of them is like any other; whereas you are making your inquiry as though they were alike.
For tell me, he said, what result is there of the arts of reckoning and geometry, in the way that a house is of building, or a coat of weaving, or other products of the sort that one might point to in various arts.
Well, can you, for your part, point to any such product in those two cases.
You cannot.
To this I replied: What you say is true; but I can point out to you what is the peculiar subject of each of these sciences, distinct in each case from the science itself.
Thus reckoning, I suppose, is concerned with the even and the odd in their numerical relations to themselves and to one another, is it not.
Certainly, he said.
And you grant that the odd and the even are different from the actual art of reckoning.
Of course.
And once more, weighing is concerned with the heavier and the lighter weight; but the heavy and the light are different from the actual art of weighing:
you agree.
I do.
Then tell me, what is that of which temperance is the science, differing from temperance itself.
There you are, Socrates, he said: you push your investigation up to the real question at issue in what temperance differs from all the other sciences but you then proceed to seek some resemblance between it and them; whereas there is no such thing, for while all the rest of the sciences have something other than themselves as their subject, this one alone is a science of the other sciences and of its own self.
And of this you are far from being unconscious, since in fact, as I believe, you are doing the very thing you denied you were doing just now: for you are attempting to refute me, without troubling to follow the subject of our discussion.
How can you think, I said, if my main effort is to refute you, that I do it with any other motive than that which would impel me to investigate the meaning of my own words
from a fear of carelessly supposing, at any moment, that I knew something while I knew it not.
And so it is now: that is what I am doing, I tell you.
I am examining the argument mainly for my own sake, but also, perhaps, for that of my other intimates.
Or do you not think it is for the common good, almost, of all men, that the truth about everything there is should be discovered.
Yes indeed, he replied, I do, Socrates.
Then take heart, I said, my admirable friend, and answer the question put to you as you deem the case to be, without caring a jot whether it is Critias or Socrates who is being refuted: give the argument itself your attention, and observe what will become of it under the test of refutation.
Well, he said, I will do so; for I think there is a good deal in what you say.
Then tell me, I said, what you mean in regard to temperance.
Why, I mean, he said, that it alone of all the sciences is the science both of itself and of the other sciences.
So then, I said, it will be the science of the lack of science also, besides being the science of science.
Certainly, he replied.
Then only the temperate person will know himself, and be able to discern what he really knows and does not know, and have the power of judging what other people likewise know and think they know, in cases where they do know, and again, what they think they know, without knowing it; everyone else will be unable.
And so this is being temperate, or temperance, and knowing oneself that one should know what one knows and what one does not know.
Is that what you mean.
It is, he replied.
Once more then, I said, as our third offering to the Saviour, let us consider afresh, in the first place, whether such a thing as this is possible or not to know that one knows, and does not know, what one knows and what one does not know; and secondly, if this is perfectly possible, what benefit we get by knowing it.
We must indeed consider, he said.
Come then, I said, Critias, consider if you can show yourself any more resourceful than I am; for I am at a loss.
Shall I explain to you in what way.
By all means, he replied.
Well, I said, what all this comes to, if your last statement was correct, is merely that there is one science which is precisely a science of itself and of the other sciences, and moreover is a science of the lack of science at the same time.
Certainly.
Then mark what a strange statement it is that we are attempting to make, my friend: for if you will consider it as applied to other cases, you will surely see so I believe its impossibility.
How so.
In what cases.
In the following: ask yourself if you think there is a sort of vision which is not the vision of things that we see in the ordinary way, but a vision of itself and of the other sorts of vision, and of the lack of vision likewise; which, while being vision, sees no color, but only itself and the other sorts of vision.
Do you think there is any such.
Upon my word, I do not.
And what do you say to a sort of hearing which hears not a single sound, but hears itself and the other sorts of hearing and lack of hearing.
I reject that also.
Then take all the senses together as a whole, and consider if you think there is any sense of the senses and of itself, but insensible of any of the things of which the other senses are sensible.
I do not.
Now, do you think there is any desire which is the desire, not of any pleasure, but of itself and of the other desires .
No, indeed.
Nor, again, is there a wish, I imagine, that wishes no good, but wishes itself and the other wishes.
Quite so; there is not.
And would you say there is any love of such a sort that it is actually a love of no beauty, but of itself and of the other loves.
Not I, he replied.
And have you ever observed any fear which fears itself and the other fears, but has no fear of a single dreadful thing.
No, I have not, he replied.
Or an opinion which is an opinion of opinions and of itself, but without any opinion such as the other opinions have.
By no means.
But it is apparently a science of this kind that we are assuming one that is a science of no branch of study, but a science of itself and of the other sciences.
So we are.
And it is a strange thing, if it really exists.
For we should not affirm as yet that it does not exist, but should still consider whether it does exist.
You are right.
Well now, this science is a science of something, that is, it has a certain faculty whereby it can be a science of something, has it not.
Certainly.
For, you know, we say the greater has a certain faculty whereby it can be greater than something.
Quite so.
That is, than something smaller, if it is to be greater.
Necessarily.
So if we could find a greater which is greater than other greater things, and than itself, but not greater than the things beside which the others are greater, I take it there can be no doubt that it would be in the situation of being, if greater than itself, at the same time smaller than itself, would it not.
Most inevitably, Socrates, he said.
Or again, if there is a double of other doubles and of itself, both it and the others must of course be halves, if it is to be their double; for, you know, a double cannot be "of" anything else than its half.
True.
And what is more than itself will also be less, and the heavier will be lighter, and the older younger, and so on with everything else: whatever has its own faculty applied to itself will have also the natural quality to which its faculty was applicable, will it not.
For instance, hearing is, as we say, just a hearing of sound, is it not.
Yes.
So if it is to hear itself, it will hear a sound of its own; for it would not hear otherwise.
Most inevitably.
And sight, I suppose, my excellent friend, if it is to see itself, must needs have a color; for sight can never see what is colorless.
No more it can.
Then do you perceive, Critias, in the various cases we have propounded, how some of them strike us as absolutely impossible, while others raise serious doubts as to the faculty of the thing being ever applicable to itself.
For with magnitudes, numbers, and the like it is absolutely impossible, is it not.
Certainly.
But again, with hearing and sight, or in the further bases of motion moving itself and heat burning itself, and all other actions of the sort, the fact must appear incredible to some, but perhaps not to others.
So what we want, my friend, is some great man who will determine to our satisfaction in every respect whether there is nothing in nature so constituted as to have its own faculty applicable to itself, and not only some other object, or whether there are some such, and others not such; and whether, again, if there are things that have such relation to themselves, they include a science which we assert to be temperance.
For my part, I distrust my own competence to determine these questions, and hence I am neither able to affirm whether it is possible that there should be a science of science, nor willing, let it be ever so true, to acknowledge this to be temperance until I have made out whether such a thing as this would benefit us or not.
For, you see, I have a presentiment that temperance is something beneficial and good; and you, therefore, son of Callaeschrus since you lay it down that temperance is this very science of science, and moreover of the lack of science shall first indicate the possibility, as I put it just now, and then the benefit added to the possibility, of such a thing; and perhaps you will then satisfy me that your definition of temperance is correct.
Now when Critias heard this and saw me in a difficulty, he seemed to me just as the sight of someone yawning opposite causes people to be affected in the same way to be compelled by the sense of my difficulty to be caught in a difficulty himself.
And so, since he usually contrived to distinguish himself, he was too ashamed to bring himself to admit to me before the company that he was unable to determine the questions with which I challenged him, and he made a very indistinct reply in order to conceal his difficulty.
Then I, to forward the discussion, remarked: Well, if you prefer, Critias, let us concede for the moment that there may possibly be a science of science : some other time we shall consider whether such is the fact or not.
Come then; suppose it is perfectly possible: how is one helped thereby to know what one knows and does not know.
For this, you are aware, we said was the meaning of self-knowledge and temperance, did we not.
Certainly, he said; and it must surely follow, Socrates;
for if a man has a science which knows itself, he will be similar himself to that which he has.
For instance, he who has swiftness will be swift, he who has beauty will be beautiful, and he who has knowledge will know; and when he has knowledge that is of itself, he will then, surely, be in the position of knowing himself.
I do not dispute, I said, that when a man has that which knows itself he will know himself; but having that, how is he bound to know what he knows and what he does not know.
Because, Socrates, the two things are the same.
I daresay, I said; but I am afraid I am still my old self: I still do not see how knowing what one knows and does not know is the same as the other.
How do you mean.
he asked.
In this way, I replied: will a science of science, if such exists, be able to do more than determine that one of two things is science, and the other is not science.
No, only that.
Now, is science or lack of science of health the same as science or lack of science of justice.
By no means.
For the one, I suppose, is medicine, and the other politics, while the thing in question is merely science.
Yes, to be sure.
And if a man has no added knowledge of health and justice, but knows only science, as having science of that alone, he will probably know that he has a certain piece of scientific knowledge about himself and about other people, will he not.
Yes.
But how will this science help him to know what he knows.
For of course he knows health by means of medicine, not temperance, and harmony by means of music, not temperance, and building by means of the builder's art, not temperance; and so it will be in every case, will it not.
Apparently.
And how will temperance, supposing it is only a science of sciences, help him to know that he knows health, or that he knows building.
By no means.
Then he who is ignorant of all this will not know what he knows, but only that he knows.
So it seems.
Then being temperate, or temperance, will not be this knowledge of what one knows or does not know, but, it would seem, merely knowing that one knows or does not know.
It looks like it.
Then such a person will also be unable to examine another man's claim to some knowledge, and make out whether he knows or does not know what he says he knows: he will merely know, it would seem, that he has a certain knowledge; but of what it is, temperance will not cause him to know.
Apparently not.
So he will be able to distinguish neither the man who pretends to be a doctor, but is none, from the man who really is one, nor any other man who has knowledge from him who has none.
But let us consider it another way: if the temperate man or anybody else would discriminate between the true doctor and the false, he will go to work thus, will he not.
He will surely not talk to him about medicine; for, as we were saying, the doctor understands nothing else but health and disease.
Is not that so.
Yes, it is.
But about science he knows nothing, for that, you know, we assigned to temperance alone.
Yes.
So the medical man knows nothing about medicine either, since medicine is, of course, a science.
True.
Then the temperate man will know, indeed, that the doctor has a certain science; but when he has to put its nature to the proof, must he not consider what its subjects are.
Is not each science marked out, not merely as a science, but as a particular one, by the particular subjects it has.
It is, to be sure.
And medicine is marked out as different from the other sciences by being a science of health and disease.
Yes.
And so anyone who wishes to inquire into medicine must make those things, whatever they may be, with which it is concerned, the matter of his inquiry; not those foreign things, I presume, with which it is not.
No, indeed.
Then he who conducts his inquiry aright will consider the doctor, as a medical man, in connection with cases of health and disease.
So it seems.
And will inquire whether, in what is said or done in such cases, his words are truly spoken, and his acts rightly done.
He must.
Well now, could anyone follow up either of these points without the medical art.
No, indeed.
Nobody at all, it would seem, but a doctor; and so not the temperate man either: for he would have to be a doctor, in addition to his temperance.
That is so.
Then inevitably, if temperance is only a science of science and of lack of science, it will be equally unable to distinguish a doctor who knows the business of his art from one who does not know but pretends or thinks he does, and any other person who has knowledge of anything at all: one will only distinguish one's fellow-artist, as craftsmen usually can.
Apparently, he said.
Then what benefit, I asked, Critias, can we still look for from temperance, if it is like that.
For if, as we began by assuming, the temperate man knew what he knew and what he did not know, and that he knows the one and does not know the other, and if he were able to observe this same condition in bother man, it would be vastly to our benefit, we agree, to be temperate; since we should pass all our lives, both we who had temperance and all the rest who were governed by us, without error.
For neither should we ourselves attempt to do what we did not know, instead of finding out those who knew and placing the matter in their hands, nor should we permit others under our governance to do anything but what they were likely to do aright; and they would do that when they had knowledge of it; and so it would be that a house which was ordered, or a state which was administered, as temperance bade, and everything else that was ruled by temperance, could not but be well ordered; for with error abolished, and rightness leading, in their every action men would be bound to do honorably and well under such conditions, and those who did well would be happy.
Did we not so speak of temperance, I said, Critias, when we remarked how great a boon it was to know what one knows and what one does not know.
To be sure we did, he replied.
Whereas now, I went on, you see that nowhere can any such science be found.
I see, he said.
Then may we say, I asked, that there is this good point in the knowledge of knowledge and of lack of knowledge, which we now find to be what temperance is, that he who has it will not only learn more easily whatever he learns, but will perceive everything more plainly, since besides the particular things that he learns he will behold the science; and hence he will probe more surely the state of other men respecting the things which he has learnt himself, while those who probe without such knowledge will do it more feebly and poorly.
Are these, my friend, the kind of advantages that we shall gain from temperance.
But are we really looking at something greater, and requiring it to be something greater than it really is.
Probably, he replied, that is so.
I daresay, I said; and I daresay also our inquiry has been worthless.
And this I conclude, because I observe certain strange facts about temperance, if it is anything like that.
For suppose, if you please, we concede that there may possibly be a science of science, and let us grant, and not withdraw, our original proposition that temperance is the knowledge of what one knows and does not know; granting all this, let us still more thoroughly inquire whether on these terms it will be of any profit to us.
For our suggestion just now, that temperance of that sort, as our guide in ordering house or state, must be a great boon, was not, to my thinking, Critias, a proper admission.
How so.
he asked.
Because, I replied, we too tightly admitted that it would be a great boon to mankind if each of us should do what he knows, but should place what he did not know in the hands of others who had the knowledge.
Well, was that, he asked, not a proper admission.
Not to my mind, I answered.
In very truth, your words are strange he said, Socrates.
Yes, by the Dog, I said, and they strike me too in the same way; and it was in view of this, just now, that I spoke of strange results that I noticed, and said I feared we were not inquiring rightly.
For in truth, let temperance be ever so much what we say it is, I see nothing to show what good effect it has on us.
How so.
he asked:
tell us, in order that we on our side may know what you mean.
I expect, I said, I am talking nonsense: but still one is bound to consider what occurs to one, and not idly ignore it, if one has even a little concern for oneself.
And you are quite right, he said.
Hear then, I said, my dream, whether it has come through horn or through ivory.
Suppose that temperance were such as we now define her, and that she had entire control of us: must it not be that every act would be done according to the sciences, and no one professing to be a pilot when he was not would deceive us, nor would a doctor, nor a general, nor anyone else pretending to know something he did not know, go undetected; and would not these conditions result in our having greater bodily health than we have now, safety in perils of the sea and war, and skilful workmanship in all our utensils, our clothes, our shoes, nay, everything about us, and various things besides, because we should be employing genuine craftsmen.
And if you liked, we might concede that prophecy, as the knowledge of what is to be, and temperance directing her, will deter the charlatans, and establish the true prophets as our prognosticators.
Thus equipped, the human race would indeed act and live according to knowledge, I grant you (for temperance, on the watch, would not suffer ignorance to foist herself in and take a hand in our labors), but that by acting according to knowledge we should do well and be happy this is a point which as yet we are unable to make out, my dear Critias.
But still, he replied, you will have some difficulty in finding any other fulfillment of welfare if you reject the rule of knowledge.
Then inform me further, I said, on one more little matter.
Of what is this knowledge.
Do you mean of shoe-making.
Good heavens, not I.
Well, of working in brass.
By no means.
Well, in wool, or in wood, or in something else of that sort.
No, indeed.
Then we no longer hold, I said, to the statement that he who lives according to knowledge is happy;
for these workers, though they live according to knowledge, are not acknowledged by you to be happy: you rather delimit the happy man, it seems to me, as one who lives according to knowledge about certain things.
And I daresay you are referring to my instance of a moment ago, the man who knows all that is to come, the prophet.
Do you refer to him or to someone else.
Yes, I refer to him, he said, and someone else too.
Whom.
I asked.
Is it the sort of person who might know, besides what is to be, both everything that has been and now is, and might be ignorant of nothing.
Let us suppose such a man exists:
you are not going to tell me, I am sure, of anyone alive who is yet more knowing than he.
No, indeed.
Then there is still one more thing I would fain know: which of the sciences is it that makes him happy.
Or does he owe it to all of them alike.
By no means to all alike, he replied.
But to which sort most.
One that gives him knowledge of what thing, present, past or future.
Is it that by which he knows draught-playing.
Draught-playing indeed he replied.
Well, reckoning.
By no means.
Well, health.
More likely, he said.
And that science to which I refer as the most likely, I went on, gives him knowledge of what.
Of good, he replied, and of evil.
Vile creature.
I said, you have all this time been dragging me round and round, while concealing the fact that the life according to knowledge does not make us do well and be happy, not even if it be knowledge of all the other knowledges together, but only if it is of this single one concerning good and evil.
For, Critias, if you choose to take away this science from the whole number of them, will medicine any the less give us health, or shoemaking give us shoes, or weaving provide clothes, or will the pilot's art any the less prevent the loss of life at sea, or the general's in war.
None the less, he replied.
But, my dear Critias, to have any of these things well and beneficially done will be out of our reach if that science is lacking.
That is true.
And that science, it seems, is not temperance, but one whose business is to benefit us;
for it is not a science of sciences and lack of sciences, but of good and evil: so that if this is beneficial, temperance must be something else to us.
But why, he asked, should not it be beneficial.
For if temperance is above all a science of the sciences, and presides too over the other sciences, surely she will govern this science of the good, and so benefit us.
And give us health also I asked: will she, and not medicine, do this.
And will the several works of the other arts be hers, and not the particular works of each art.
Have we not constantly protested that she is only knowledge of knowledge and of lack of knowledge, and of nothing else.
Is not that so.
Apparently it is.
Then she will not be a producer of health.
No, indeed.
For health, we said, belongs to another art, did we not.
We did.
Nor of benefit, my good friend; for this work, again, we assigned to another art just now, did we not.
Certainly.
Then how will temperance be beneficial, if it produces no benefit.
By no means, Socrates, as it seems.
So do you see, Critias, how all the time I had good reason for my fear, and fair ground for the reproach I made against myself, that my inquiry regarding temperance was worthless.
For I cannot think that what is admitted to be the noblest thing in the world would have appeared to us useless if I had been of any use for making a good search.
But now, you see, we are worsted every way, and cannot discover what thing it can possibly be to which the lawgiver gave this name, temperance.
And yet we have conceded many points which were not deducible from our argument.
For you know we conceded that there was a science of science, when the argument was against it and would not agree; and we further conceded that this science could know the works also of the other sciences, when the argument was against this too, in order to make out that the temperate man had a knowledge of what he knew and did not know, so as to know that he knew the one and did not know the other.
And we made this concession in a really magnificent manner, without considering the impossibility of a man knowing, in some sort of way, things that he does not know at all; for our admission says that he knows that he does not know them; and yet, in my opinion, there can be nothing more irrational than this.
Nevertheless, although it has found us so simple-minded and tractable, the inquiry remains quite incapable of discovering the truth, but has utterly flouted it by most impudently showing us the inutility of that which we had been ever so long assuming, by our joint admissions and fictions, to be the meaning of temperance.
Now, so far as I am concerned, I am not particularly distressed: but for your sake, I said, Charmides, I am seriously distressed to think that you, with your goodly form and most temperate soul besides, are to have no profit or advantage from the presence of that temperance in all your life.
And I am still more distressed about the charm which I learnt from the Thracian, that I should have spent so much pains on a lesson which has had such a worthless effect.
Now I really do not think that this can be the case, but rather that I am a poor hand at inquiring; for temperance I hold to be a great good, and you to be highly blessed, if you actually have it.
See now whether you have it, and are in no need of the charm; for if it is yours, I should rather advise you to regard me as a babbler who is unable to argue out any subject of inquiry whatsoever, and yourself as advancing in happiness as you advance in temperance.
Then Charmides said: Why, upon my word, Socrates, I do not know at all whether I have it or have it not.
For how can I know, when even you two are unable to discover what this thing is.
so you say, but of this you do not at all convince me and I quite believe, Socrates, that I do need the charm, and for my part I have no objection to being charmed by you every day of my life, until you say I have had enough of the treatment.
Very well, said Critias: now, Charmides, if you do this, it will be a proof to me of your temperance if you submit to be charmed by Socrates and do not forsake him through thick and thin.
Count on me to follow, he said, and not forsake him; for it would ill become me to disobey you, my guardian, and refuse to do your bidding.
Well now, he said, I bid you.
Then I will do as you say, he replied, and will start this very day.
There, there, I said, what are you two plotting to do.
Nothing, replied Charmides; we have made our plot.
So you will use force, I said, before even allowing me to make my affidavit.
You must expect me to use force, he replied, since he gives me the command: take counsel, therefore, on your side, as to what you will do
But that leaves no room, I said, for counsel; for if once you set about doing anything and use force, no man alive will be able to withstand you.
Then do not you, he said, withstand me.
Then I will not withstand you, I replied.
Laches
Lysimachus
Melesias
Nicias
Laches
Sons of Lysimachus and Melesias
Socrates
Lysimachus
You have seen the performance of the man fighting in armour, Nicias and Laches; but my friend Melesias and I did not tell you at the time our reason for requesting you to come and see it with us.
However, we will tell you now;
for we think we should speak our minds freely to friends like you.
Some people, of course, pour ridicule on such appeals, and when consulted for their advice will not say what they think, but something different, making the inquirer's wishes their aim, and speaking against their own judgement.
But you, we consider, not merely have the necessary discernment but will give us the benefit of it in telling us just what is in your minds and hence we have enlisted your counsel on the question which we are about to lay before you.
Now the matter about which I have made all this long preamble is this:
we have two sons here, my friend that one, called Thucydides after his grandfather, and I this one; he also is named in the same way, after my father; we call him Aristeides.
Well, we have resolved to give them our most constant care, and not as most fathers do when their boys begin to be young men let them run loose as their fancy leads them, but begin forthwith taking every possible care of them.
Now, knowing that you too have sons, we thought that you above all men must have concerned yourselves with the question of the kind of upbringing that would make the best of them; and if by any chance you have not given your attention to the subject, we would remind you that it ought not to be neglected, and we invite you to join us in arranging some way of taking care of our sons.
How we formed this resolve, Nicias and Laches, is worth hearing, even though the story be somewhat long.
My friend Melesias and I take our meals together, and our boys share our table.
Now, as I said at the beginning of my remarks, we are going to speak quite freely to you.
Each of us has many noble deeds of his own father to relate to these young fellows their numerous achievements both in war and in peace, when they were managing the affairs either of the allies or of this city; but neither of us has any deeds of his own to tell.
We cannot help feeling ashamed that our boys should observe this, and we blame our fathers for leaving us to indulge ourselves when we began to be young men, while they looked after other folks' affairs; and we point the moral of it all to these young people, telling them that if they are careless of themselves and will not take our advice they will win no reputation, but if they take due pains they may very likely come to be worthy of the names they bear.
Now they, for their part, say they will do as we bid; so we are now considering what lessons or pursuits will lead them to the highest attainable excellence.
Someone directed us to this particular accomplishment of fighting in armor, as being an admirable one for a young man to learn; and he praised that man whose performance you were just watching, and then urged us to go and see him.
So we decided that it would be well to go and see the man ourselves, and to take you along with us not merely as companions at the show, but also as counsellors and copartners, if you will be so good, in the matter of looking after our sons.
That is the question which we wanted to discuss with you.
And we look to you now, on your part, to give us your advice, first as to whether you think this accomplishment should be learnt or not, and then as to any other such art or pursuit that you can recommend for a young man; and also, how you feel inclined as regards our partnership.
Nicias
For myself, Lysimachus and Melesias, I highly approve of your purpose, and am ready to lend a hand and I may say the same, I think, for Laches here.
Laches
Yes, you think truly, Nicias.
For that remark which Lysimachus made just now about his father and the father of Melesias was very apposite, in my opinion, not only to them but to us and to all who deal with public affairs: it is practically the rule with them, as he says, to treat their private concerns, whether connected with children or any thing else, in a slighting, careless spirit.
You are quite right in saying that, Lysimachus; but to invite us to be your advisers for the education of your boys, and not to invite Socrates here, is to me very strange, when, to begin with, he is of your district, and then he is always spending his time wherever there is any such excellent study or pursuit for young men as you are seeking.
Lysimachus
How do you mean, Laches.
Has Socrates here given his attention to anything of this sort.
Laches
To be sure he has, Lysimachus.
Nicias
I too might perhaps be in as good a position as Laches to inform you about that; for quite recently he introduced to myself a music-teacher for my son Damon, pupil of Agathocles, who is not only the most exquisitely skilled of musicians, but in every other way as profitable a companion as you could wish for young men of that age.
Lysimachus
It is not possible, Socrates, Nicias, and Laches, for men of my years to continue to know our juniors, because old age makes us spend most of our time at home; but if you, son of Sophroniscus, have any good advice for our friend, who belongs to your own district, you ought to let him have it.
And it is only right that you should: for you happen to be our friend through your father he and I were constant companions and friends, and he died without ever having a single difference with me.
And a certain recollection comes back to me on hearing what has just been said: for these boys, in talking with each other at home, frequently mention Socrates in terms of high praise; but I have never asked them whether they meant the son of Sophroniscus.
Now tell me, my boys, is this the Socrates whose name you have mentioned so often.
Son
To be sure, father, it is he.
Lysimachus
On my soul, Socrates, it is good to know that you keep up your father's name, which was a most honorable one, both on general grounds and particularly because of the intimate relation in which you and we shall equally feel ourselves to be.
Laches
Indeed, Lysimachus, he is a person you must not lose hold of; for I have observed him elsewhere too keeping up not merely his father's but his country's name.
He accompanied me in the retreat from Delium, and I assure you that if the rest had chosen to be like him, our city would be holding up her head and would not then have had such a terrible fall.
Lysimachus
Socrates, this is indeed splendid praise which you are now receiving from men whose word is of great weight, and for such conduct as wins their praise.
So let me tell you that I rejoice to hear this and to know you have such a good reputation; and you in return must count me as one of your warmest well-wishers.
You ought indeed, on your own part, to have visited us before, and treated us on intimate terms, as you have a right to do: now, however, that we have discovered each other, from to-day onwards you must make a point of sharing our thoughts and getting to know us and our young people also, that you and they may in your turn preserve the friendship of our houses.
That, however, you will do yourself, and we will remind you of it another time: but what do you say of the matter on which we began to speak.
What is your view.
Is the accomplishment of fighting in armor a suitable one for our boys to learn or not.
Socrates
On that matter, Lysimachus, I will do my best to advise you, so far as I can, and also to do all the rest that you so kindly ask.
It seems to me, however, most proper that I, being so much younger and less experienced than you and your friends, should first hear what they have to say, and learn of them; and then, if I have anything else to suggest as against their remarks, I might try to explain it and persuade you and them to take my view.
Come, Nicias, let one or other of you speak.
Nicias
There is no difficulty about that, Socrates.
For in my opinion this accomplishment is in many ways a useful thing for young men to possess.
It is good for them, instead of spending their time on the ordinary things to which young men usually give their hours of leisure, to spend it on this, which not only has the necessary effect of improving their bodily health since it is as good and strenuous as any physical exercise but is also a form of exercise which, with riding, is particularly fitting for a free citizen; for only the men trained in the use of these warlike implements can claim to be trained in the contest whereof we are athletes and in the affairs wherein we are called upon to contend.
Further, this accomplishment will be of some benefit also in actual battle, when it comes to fighting in line with a number of other men; but its greatest advantage will be felt when the ranks are broken, and you find you must fight man to man, either in pursuing someone who is trying to beat off your attack, or in retreating yourself and beating off the attack of another.
Whoever possessed this accomplishment could come to no harm so long as he had but one to deal with, nor yet, perhaps, if he had several; it would give him an advantage in any situation.
Moreover, it is a thing which impels one to desire another noble accomplishment; for everyone who has learnt how to fight in armor will desire to learn the accomplishment which comes next, the management of troops; and when he has got that and once taken a pride in his work he will push on to attain the whole art of generalship.
It is evident already that all accomplishments and pursuits in the military sphere are both honourable and valuable to a man, either in acquisition or in practice; and this particular one may well be an introduction to them.
And we can make this addition no slight one to its claims, that this science will make any man individually a great deal bolder and braver in war.
Nor let us disdain to mention, even though some may think it a rather slight matter, that it will give him a smarter appearance in the place where a man should look smartest, and where at the same time he will appear more terrible to the enemy because of his smartness.
So my opinion is, Lysimachus, as I say, that we ought to teach this skill to our young men, and I have told you my reasons for so thinking.
But if Laches has a different view to state, I shall be as glad as anyone to hear it.
Laches
Well, Nicias, I am loth to say of any sort of accomplishment that it ought not to be learnt; for it seems good to know all things.
And besides, if this skill in arms is an accomplishment, as they say who teach it, and as Nicias terms it, it ought to be learnt; while if it is not an accomplishment, and those who promise to give it are deceiving us, or if it is an accomplishment, but not a very important one, what can be the good of learning it.
I speak of it in this way from the following point of view: I conceive that if there were anything in it, it would not have been overlooked by the Lacedaemonians, whose only concern in life is to seek out and practise whatever study or pursuit will give them an advantage over others in war.
And if they have overlooked it, at any rate these teachers of it cannot have overlooked the obvious fact that the Lacedaemonians are more intent on such matters than any of the Greeks, and that anybody who won honour among them for this art would amass great riches elsewhere, just as a tragic poet does who has won honor among us.
And for this reason he who thinks himself a good writer of tragedy does not tour round with his show in a circuit of the outlying Attic towns, but makes a straight line for this place and exhibits to our people, as one might expect.
But I notice that these fighters in armour regard Lacedaemon as holy ground where none may tread, and do not step on it even with the tips of their toes, but circle round it and prefer to exhibit to any other people, especially to those who would themselves admit that they were inferior to many in the arts of war.
Furthermore, Lysimachus, I have come across more than a few of these persons in actual operations, and I can see their quality.
Indeed, we can estimate it offhand:
for, as though it were of set purpose, not one of these experts in arms has ever yet distinguished himself in war.
And yet in all the other arts, the men who have made a name are to be found among those who have specially pursued one or other of them; while these persons, apparently, stand out from the rest in this particularly hapless fate of their profession.
Why, this man Stesilaus, whom you watched with me in that great crowd as he gave his performance and spoke in those high terms of himself before us, I have watched elsewhere giving a finer entertainment in the form of a very real display that he made against his will.
The ship on which he was serving struck a transport vessel, and he was using in the fight a combination of a scythe and a spear a remarkable weapon that suited so remarkable a man.
Well, the story of this fellow's doings is hardly of enough interest in the main, but you must hear the upshot of his device of a scythe fixed to a spear.
As he was fighting, it stuck somehow in the other ship's rigging, and held fast; so Stesilaus pulled at it in the hope of getting it free, but he could not, and the ships were passing by each other.
For the first moments he ran along in his ship holding on to his spear; but as the other ship sheered off from his and drew him after, still holding the spear, he let it slip through his hand until he gripped the butt-end of the shaft.
From the crew of the transport there came laughter and clapping at his posture, and when someone aimed a stone at him which hit the deck near his feet, and he let go the spear, the troops on the warship in their turn could no longer restrain their laughter, as they saw the notable scythe-spear dangling from the transport.
Now, there may perhaps be something in this art of theirs, as Nicias argues, but at any rate that is my impression of it, in the cases I have met with.
Hence, as I said at the beginning, whether it be an accomplishment, and one of but little use, or not an accomplishment, but only supposed and pretended to be such, it is not worth the trouble of learning it.
For indeed I hold that if a man who was a coward believed that he possessed it, his only gain would be in rashness, which would make his true nature the more conspicuous; while if he were brave, people would be on the look-out for even the slightest mistake on his part, and he would incur much grievous slander; for the pretension to such skill arouses jealousy, so that unless a man be prodigiously superior to the rest in valor he cannot by any means escape being made a laughing-stock through professing to be so skilled.
Such is my opinion, Lysimachus, of the interest taken in this accomplishment; but do as I told you at the beginning; you are not to let our friend Socrates go, but must request him to advise us according to his judgement on the matter in hand.
Lysimachus
Well, I ask it of you, Socrates: for indeed our members of council, as it were, seem to me to need someone who will decide between them.
Had these two agreed, we should not have required this help so much; but as it is for Laches, you see, has voted on the opposite side to Nicias it is as well that we should hear your view and see on which side you cast your vote.
Socrates
What, Lysimachus.
Are you going to join the side which gets the approval of the majority of us.
Lysimachus
Why, what can one do, Socrates.
Socrates
And you too, Melesias, would do the same.
Suppose you had a consultation as to what your son's exercise should be for a coming contest, would you be guided by the majority of us, or by the one who happened to have trained and exercised under a good master.
Melesias
By the latter, naturally, Socrates.
Socrates
Would you be guided by him alone rather than the four of us.
Melesias
Very likely.
Socrates
Yes, for a question must be decided by knowledge, and not by numbers, if it is to have a right decision.
Melesias
To be sure.
Socrates
Then in this case also we must first consider, in particular, whether anyone among us has expert skill in the subject of our consultation, or not; and if here is one who has, we must be guided by him, though he be but one, and pass over the rest; while if there is not, we must look for somebody else.
Or do you think it a slight matter that you and Lysimachus have now at stake, and not that which is really your greatest possession.
For I take it that according as the sons turn out well or the opposite will the whole life of their father's house be affected, depending for better or worse on their character.
Melesias
Truly spoken.
Socrates
So it demands much forethought from us.
Melesias
Certainly.
Socrates
How then to take the case I suggested just now should we set to work if we wanted to consider which of us was the most expert in regard to a contest.
Should we not pick him who had learnt and practised, and had also had good teachers of this particular skill.
Melesias
I think so.
Socrates
And even before that, we should ask what was this skill of which we are looking for the teachers.
Melesias
How do you mean.
Socrates
Perhaps it will be more easily grasped in this form.
I think we have not started with an agreement between us as to what the thing is about which we are consulting, in this question of who among us is an expert and to this end has resorted to teachers, and who not.
Nicias
Why, Socrates, is it not fighting in armor that we are considering, and whether it is a thing to be learnt by young men or not.
Socrates
Of course, Nicias;
but when someone considers whether a medicine is to be used as an eyesalve or not, do you think that this consultation is about the medicine or about the eyes.
Nicias
About the eyes.
Socrates
And when one considers whether a horse is to be bridled or not, and at what time, I presume one takes counsel about the horse, and not about the bridle.
Nicias
True.
Socrates
And in a word, when one considers a thing for any purpose, the consulting is in fact about the end one had in view to start with, and not about the means to be used for such end.
Nicias
Necessarily.
Socrates
So we must consider our adviser too, and ask ourselves whether he is a skilled expert in the treatment required for the end which is the subject of our consideration.
Nicias
Certainly.
Socrates
And we say that our present subject is an accomplishment studied for the sake of young men's souls.
Nicias
Yes.
Socrates
So what we have to consider is whether one of us is skilled in treatment of the soul, and is able to treat it rightly, and which of us has had good teachers.
Laches
But I say, Socrates, have you never noticed how some people have become more skilled in certain things without teachers than others with them.
Socrates
Yes, I have, Laches; people, that is, whom you would not care to trust on their mere statement that they were good practitioners, unless they could put forward some example of their personal skill some work well carried out not in one only, but several cases.
Laches
That is truly spoken.
Socrates
We also, therefore, Laches and Nicias since Lysimachus and Melesias have invited us to a consultation on their sons, whose souls they are anxious to have as good as possible should bring to their notice what teachers we have had, if we say that we have any to mention, who being themselves good to begin with, and having treated the souls of many young people, taught us also in due course and are known to have done so.
Or if any of ourselves says he has had no teacher, but has however some works of his own to speak of, and can point out to us what Athenians or strangers, either slaves or freemen, are acknowledged to owe their goodness to him, let him do so.
But if there is nothing of the sort to be found amongst us, let us bid them look elsewhere; for we cannot run a risk with our good friends' children where we may ruin them, and so bring upon us the most grievous of accusations from our nearest and dearest.
Now I, Lysimachus and Melesias, am the first to avow that I have had no teacher in this respect;
and yet I have longed for such lessons from my youth up.
But I have not the means to pay fees to the sophists, who were the only persons that professed to be able to make me a complete gentleman; and to this moment I remain powerless to discover the art myself.
But I should not be surprised if Nicias or Laches has discovered or learnt it: for they have more means at their command to enable them to learn from others, and they are also older, and have had time to discover it.
Indeed, I regard them as able to educate a man; for they would never declare their minds so freely on pursuits that are beneficial or harmful to a youth unless they felt confident that they had the requisite knowledge.
And I have entire confidence in them myself, except that I wondered at their differing from each other.
I therefore make this counter-request of you, Lysimachus: just as Laches urged you a moment ago not to release me but to ask me questions, so I now call upon you not to release Laches or Nicias, but to question them in these terms: "Socrates says that he has no understanding of the matter, and that he is not competent to decide which of your statements is true; that he has never been either a discoverer or a learner of anything of the sort.
But you, Laches and Nicias, are each to tell us who is the cleverest person you have heard on the upbringing of youth; whether you have knowledge of it by learning from someone or by discovering it yourselves; and if you learnt it, who were your teachers respectively, and what other colleagues they had: in order that, if you are not at leisure through the demands of public business, we may go to them and induce them either with gifts or good turns or with both to undertake the care of our and your children together, and so prevent them from turning out knaves and disgracing their ancestors.
But if you have made the grand discovery yourselves, give us an instance to show what other persons you have succeeded in changing, by your care of them, from knaves to honest gentlemen.
For if you are now going to make your first attempt at educating, you must beware lest you try your experiment, not on a "corpus vile", but on your sons and the children of your friends, and you prove to be a mere case, as the proverbial saying has it, of starting pottery on a wine-jar.
So tell us what you claim, or do not claim, as your resources and acquirements in this kind.
"There, Lysimachus, demand that from these good persons, and do not let them off."
Lysimachus
To my mind, good sirs, these remarks of Socrates are excellent: but it is for you, Nicias and Laches, to decide for yourselves whether it suits you to be questioned and offer some explanation on such points.
For I and Melesias here would certainly be delighted if you would consent to expound in detail all that Socrates puts to you in his questions: as I began by saying at the outset, we invited you to consult with us just because we thought, very naturally, that you had given serious consideration to this kind of thing, especially as your boys, like ours, are almost of an age to be educated.
Accordingly, if it is all the same to you, discuss it now by joint inquiry with Socrates, exchanging view's with him in turn: for it is a particularly good remark of his that we are consulting now about the greatest of all our concerns.
Come, see if you consider that this is the proper course to take.
Nicias
Lysimachus, it looks to me, in very truth, as though you only knew Socrates at second hand through his father and had not conversed with him personally except in his childhood, when you may have chanced to meet him among the people of his district, accompanying his father at the temple or at some local gathering.
But you have evidently not yet had to do with him since he has reached maturer years.
Lysimachus
How are you so sure of that, Nicias.
Nicias
You strike me as not being aware that, whoever comes into close contact with Socrates and has any talk with him face to face, is bound to be drawn round and round by him in the course of the argument though it may have started at first on a quite different theme and cannot stop until he is led into giving an account of himself, of the manner in which he now spends his days, and of the kind of life he has lived hitherto; and when once he has been led into that, Socrates will never let him go until he has thoroughly and properly put all his ways to the test.
Now I am accustomed to him, and so I know that one is bound to be thus treated by him, and further, that I myself shall certainly get the same treatment also.
For I delight, Lysimachus, in conversing with the man, and see no harm in our being reminded of any past or present misdoing: nay, one must needs take more careful thought for the rest of one's life, if one does not fly from his words but is willing, as Solon said, "I grow old learning ever more and more;"
and zealous to learn as long as one lives, and does not expect to get good sense by the mere arrival of old age.
So to me there is nothing unusual, or unpleasant either, in being tried and tested by Socrates; in fact, I knew pretty well all the time that our argument would not be about the boys if Socrates were present, but about ourselves.
Let me therefore repeat that there is no objection on my part to holding a debate with Socrates after the fashion that he likes; but you must see how Laches here feels on the matter.
Laches
I have but a single mind, Nicias, in regard to discussions, or if you like, a double rather than a single one.
For you might think me a lover, and yet also a hater, of discussions: for when I hear a man discussing virtue or any kind of wisdom, one who is truly a man and worthy of his argument, I am exceedingly delighted; I take the speaker and his speech together, and observe how they sort and harmonize with each other.
Such a man is exactly what I understand by "musical," he has tuned himself with the fairest harmony, not that of a lyre or other entertaining instrument, but has made a true concord of his own life between his words and his deeds, not in the Ionian, no, nor in the Phrygian nor in the Lydian, but simply in the Dorian mode, which is the sole Hellenic harmony.
Such a man makes me rejoice with his utterance, and anyone would judge me then a lover of discussion, so eagerly do I take in what he says: but a man who shows the opposite character gives me pain, and the better he seems to speak, the more I am pained, with the result, in this case, that I am judged a hater of discussion.
Now of Socrates' words I have no experience, but formerly, I fancy, I have made trial of his deeds; and there I found him living up to any fine words however freely spoken.
So if he has that gift as well, his wish is mine, and I should be very glad to be cross-examined by such a man, and should not chafe at learning; but I too agree with Solon, while adding just one word to his saying: I should like, as I grow old, to learn more and more, but only from honest folk.
Let him concede to me that my teacher is himself good else I shall dislike my lessons and be judged a dunce but if you say that my teacher is to be a younger man, or one who so far has no reputation, or anything of that sort, I care not a jot.
I therefore invite you, Socrates, both to teach and to refute me as much as you please, and to learn too what I on my part know; such is the position you hold in my eyes since that day on which you came through the same danger with me, and gave a proof of your own valour which is to be expected of anyone who hopes to justify his good name.
So say whatever you like, leaving out of account the difference of our ages.
Socrates
You two, it seems, will give us no bound for complaint on the score of your not being ready to join both in advising and in inquiring.
Lysimachus
No, but the matter now rests with us, Socrates; for I venture to count you as one of us.
So take my place in inquiring on behalf of the young men make out what it is that we want our friends here to tell us, and be our adviser by discussing it with them.
For I find that owing to my age I forget the questions I intend to put, and also the answers I receive; and if the discussion changes in the middle, my memory goes altogether.
Do you therefore discuss and elucidate our problem among yourselves; and I will listen, and then with my friend Melesias I will act at once upon whatever may be your decision.
Socrates
Let us do, Nicias and Laches, as Lysimachus and Melesias bid us.
Now the questions that we attempted to consider a while ago "Who have been our teachers in this sort of training. What other persons have we made better" are perhaps of a kind on which we might well examine ourselves:
but I believe this other way of inquiring leads to the same thing, and will probably also start more from the beginning.
For if we happen to know of such and such a thing that by being joined to another thing it makes this thing better, and further, if we are able to get the one joined to the other, we obviously know the thing itself on which we might be consulting as to how it might be best and most easily acquired.
Now I daresay you do not grasp my meaning.
Well, you will grasp it more easily in this way.
If we happen to know that sight joined to eyes makes those eyes the better for it, and further if we are able to get it joined to eyes, we obviously know what this faculty of sight is, on which we might be consulting as to how it might be best and most easily acquired.
For if we did not know first of all what sight or hearing is, we should hardly prove ourselves consultants or physicians of credit in the matter of eyes or ears, and the best way of acquiring sight or hearing.
Laches
Truly spoken, Socrates.
Socrates
And you know, Laches, at this moment our two friends are inviting us to a consultation as to the way in which virtue may be joined to their sons' souls, and so make them better.
Laches
Yes, indeed,
Socrates
Then our first requisite is to know what virtue is.
For surely, if we had no idea at all what virtue actually is, we could not possibly consult with anyone as to how he might best acquire it.
Laches
I certainly think not, Socrates.
Socrates
Then we say, Laches, that we know what it is.
Laches
I suppose we must.
Socrates
And of that which we know, I presume, we can also say what it is.
Laches
To be sure.
Socrates
Let us not, therefore, my good friend, inquire forthwith about the whole of virtue, since that may well be too much for us; but let us first see ifwe are sufficiently provided with knowledge about some part of it.
In all likelihood this will make our inquiry easier.
Laches
Yes, let us do as you propose, Socrates.
Socrates
Then which of the parts of virtue shall we choose.
Clearly, I think, that which the art of fighting in armor is supposed to promote; and that, of course, is generally supposed to be courage, is it not.
Laches
Yes, it generally is, to be sure.
Socrates
Then let our first endeavor be, Laches, to say what courage is: after that we can proceed to inquire in what way our young men may obtain it, in so far as it is to be obtained by means of pursuits and studies.
Come, try and tell me, as I suggest, what is courage.
Laches
On my word, Socrates, that is nothing difficult: anyone who is willing to stay at his post and face the enemy, and does not run away, you may be sure, is courageous.
Socrates
Rightly spoken, Laches; but I fear I am to blame, by not putting it clearly, for your having answered not the intention of my question, but something else.
Laches
What do you mean by that, Socrates.
Socrates
I will explain, so far as I can:
let us take that man to be courageous who, as you describe him yourself, stays at his post and fights the enemy.
Laches
I, for one, agree to that.
Socrates
Yes, and I do too.
But what of this other kind of man, who fights the enemy while fleeing, and not staying.
Laches
How fleeing.
Socrates
Well, as the Scythians are said to fight, as much fleeing as pursuing; and as you know Homer says in praise of Aeneas' horses, that they knew ""how to pursue and to flee in fright full swiftly this way and that way;""Hom.
- and he glorifies Aeneas himself for this very knowledge of fright, calling him prompter of fright.
Laches
And very properly too, Socrates; for he was speaking of chariots; and so are you speaking of the mode of the Scythian horsemen.
That is the way of cavalry fighting but with men-at-arms it is as I state it.
Socrates
Except, perhaps, Laches, in the case of the Spartans.
For they say that at Plataea, when the Spartans came up to the men with wicker shields, they were not willing to stand and fight against these, but fled; when, however, the Persian ranks weree broken, the Spartans kept turning round and fighting like cavalry, and so won that great battle.
Laches
What you say is true.
Socrates
And so this is what I meant just now by sayng that I was to blame for your wrong answer, by putting my question wrongly.
For I wanted to have your view not only of brave men-at-arms, but also of courage in cavalry and in the entire warrior class; and of the courageous not only in war but in the perils of the sea, and all who in disease and poverty, or again in public affairs, are courageous; and further, all who are not merely courageous against pain or fear, but doughty fighters against desires and pleasures, whether standing their ground or turning back upon the foe for I take it, Laches, there are courageous people in all these kinds.
Laches
Very much so, Socrates.
Socrates
Then all these are courageous, only some have acquired courage in pleasures, some in pains, some in desires and some in fears, while others, I conceive, have acquired cowardice in these same things.
Laches
To be sure.
Socrates
What either of them is
that is what I wanted to know.
So try again, and tell me first what is this thing, courage, which is the same in all of these cases; or do you still not comprehend my meaning.
Laches
Not very well.
Socrates
I mean in this way: suppose, for instance, I were asking you what is quickness, as we find it in running and harping, in speaking and learning, and in many other activities, and as possessed by us practically in any action worth mentioning, whether of arms or legs, or mouth or voice, or mind: or do you not use the word so.
Laches
Yes, to be sure.
Socrates
Well then, suppose someone asked me: Socrates, what do you mean by this thing which in all cases you term quickness.
My reply would be: The faculty that gets a great deal done in a little time is what I call quickness, whether in a voice or in a race or in any of the other instances.
Laches
Your statement would be quite correct.
Socrates
So now try and tell me on your part, Laches, about courage in the same way: what faculty is it, the same whether in pleasure or in pain or in any of the things in which we said just now it was to be found, that has been singled out by the name of courage.
Laches
Well then, I take it to be a certain endurance of the soul, if I am to speak of the natural quality that appears in them all.
Socrates
Why, of course we must, if we are each to answer the other's actual question.
Now it appears to me that by no means all endurance, as I conceive it, can appear to you to be courage.
And my grounds for thinking so are these: I am almost certain, Laches, that you rank courage among the nobler qualities.
Laches
Nay, among the noblest, you may be quite certain.
Socrates
And endurance joined with wisdom is noble and good.
Laches
Very much so.
Socrates
But what of it when joined with folly.
Is it not, on the contrary, hurtful and mischievous.
Laches
Yes.
Socrates
And can you say that such a thing is noble, when it is both mischievous and hurtful.
Laches
Not with any justice, Socrates.
Socrates
Then you will not admit that such an endurance is courage, seeing that it is not noble, whereas courage is a noble quality.
Laches
That is true.
Socrates
So, by your account, wise endurance will be courage.
Laches
Apparently.
Socrates
Now let us see in what it is wise.
In all things, whether great or small.
For instance, if a man endures in spending money wisely, because he knows that by spending he will gain more, would you call him courageous.
Laches
On my word, not I.
Socrates
Or what do you call it in the case of a doctor who, when his son or anyone else is suffering from inflammation of the lungs and begs for something to drink or eat, inflexibly and enduringly refuses.
Laches
That is no case of it, in any sense, either.
Socrates
Well now, when a man endures in war, and is willing to fight, on a wise calculation whereby he knows that others will come to his aid, and that the forces against him will be fewer and feebler than those who are with him, and when he has besides the advantage of position, would you say of this man, if he endures with such wisdom and preparation, that he, or a man in the opposing army who is willing to stand up against him and endure, is the more courageous.
Laches
The man opposed to him, I should say, Socrates.
Socrates
But yet his endurance is more foolish than that of the first man.
Laches
That is true.
Socrates
So you would say that he who in a cavalry fight endures with a knowledge of horsemanship is less courageous than he who endures without it.
Laches
Yes, I think so.
Socrates
And he who endures with a skill in slinging or shooting or other such art.
Laches
To be sure.
Socrates
And anyone who agrees to descend into a well, and to dive, and to endure in this or other such action, without being an adept in these things, you would say is more courageous than the adepts.
Laches
Yes, for what else can one say, Socrates.
Socrates
Nothing, provided one thinks so.
Laches
But I do think it.
Socrates
And you observe, I suppose, Laches, that persons of this sort are more foolish in their risks and endurances than those who do it with proper skill.
Laches
Evidently.
Socrates
Now, we found before that foolish boldness and endurance are base and hurtful.
Laches
Quite so.
Socrates
But courage was admitted to be something noble.
Laches
Yes, it was.
Socrates
Whereas now, on the contrary, we say that this base thing foolish endurance is courage.
Laches
Apparently.
Socrates
Then do you think our statement is correct.
Laches
On my word, Socrates, not I.
Socrates
Hence I presume that, on your showing, you and I, Laches, are not tuned to the Dorian harmony: for our deeds do not accord with our words.
By our deeds, most likely, the world might judge us to have our share of courage, but not by our words, I fancy, if they should hear the way we are talking now.
Laches
That is very true.
Socrates
Well now, does it seem right that we should be in such a condition.
Laches
Not by any means.
Socrates
Then do you mind if we accept our statement to a certain point.
Laches
To what point do you mean, and what statement.
Socrates
That which enjoins endurance.
And, if you please, let us too be steadfast and enduring in our inquiry, so as not to be ridiculed by courage herself for failing to be courageous in our search for her, when we might perchance find after all that this very endurance is courage.
Laches
For my part I am ready, Socrates, to continue without faltering; and yet I am unaccustomed to discussions of this sort.
But a certain ambitious ardour has got hold of me at hearing what has been said, and I am truly vexed at finding myself unable to express offhand what I think.
For I feel that I conceive in thought what courage is, but somehow or other she has given me the slip for the moment, so that I fail to lay hold of her in speech and state what she is.
Socrates
Well, my dear sir, the good huntsman must follow the hounds and not give up the chase.
Laches
Yes, indeed, by all means.
Socrates
Then do you agree to our inviting Nicias here to join in our hunt if he is more resourceful than we are.
Laches
I agree, of course.
Socrates
Come now, Nicias, and use what powers you have to assist your friends, who are caught in a storm of argument and are quite perplexed.
You see the perplexity of our case; you must now tell us what you think courage is, and so at once set us free from our perplexity and give your own thoughts the stability of speech.
Nicias
Well, for some time I have been thinking, Socrates, that you two are not defining courage in the right way; for you are not acting upon an admirable remark which I have formerly heard you make.
Socrates
What is that, Nicias.
Nicias
I have often heard you say that every man is good in that wherein he is wise, and bad in that wherein he is unlearned.
Socrates
Well, that is true, Nicias, I must say.
Nicias
And hence, if the brave man is good, clearly he must be wise.
Socrates
Do you hear him, Laches.
Laches
I do, without understanding very well what he says.
Socrates
But I think I understand it: our friend appears to me to mean that courage is a kind of wisdom.
Laches
What kind of wisdom, Socrates.
Socrates
Well, will you put that question to your friend here.
Laches
I do.
Socrates
Come now, tell him, Nicias, what kind of wisdom courage may be, by your account.
Not that, I presume, of flute-playing.
Nicias
Not at all.
Socrates
Nor yet that of harping.
Nicias
Oh, no.
Socrates
But what is this knowledge then, or of what.
Laches
I must say you question him quite correctly, Socrates, so let him just tell us what he thinks it is.
Nicias
I say, Laches, that it is this the knowledge of what is to be dreaded or dared, either in war or in anything else.
Laches
How strangely he talks, Socrates.
Socrates
What is it that makes you say that, Laches.
Laches
What is it.
Why, surely wisdom is distinct from courage.
Socrates
Well, Nicias denies that.
Laches
He does indeed, to be sure: that is where he just babbles.
Socrates
Then let us instruct and not abuse him.
Nicias
No, it seems to me, Socrates, that Laches wants to have it proved that I am talking nonsense, because he was proved a moment ago to be in the same case himself.
Laches
Quite so, Nicias, and I will try to make it evident.
You are talking nonsense: for instance, do not doctors know what is to be dreaded in disease.
Or do you suppose that the courageous know this.
Or do you call doctors courageous
Nicias
No, not at all.
Laches
Nor, I fancy, farmers either.
And yet they, I presume, know what is to be dreaded in farming, and every other skilled worker knows what is to be dreaded and dared in his own craft; but they are none the more courageous for that.
Socrates
What is Laches saying, in your opinion, Nicias.
There does seem to be something in it.
Nicias
Yes, there is something, only it is not true.
Socrates
How so.
Nicias
Because he thinks that doctors know something more, in treating sick persons, than how to tell what is healthy and what diseased.
This, I imagine, is all that they know: but to tell whether health itself is to be dreaded by anyone rather than sickness, do you suppose, Laches, that this is within a doctor's knowledge.
Do you not think that for many it is better that they should never arise from their bed of sickness.
Pray tell me, do you say that in every case it is better to live.
Is it not often preferable to be dead.
Laches
I do think that is so.
Nicias
And do you think that the same things are to be dreaded by those who were better dead, as by those who had better live.
Laches
No, I do not.
Nicias
Well, do you attribute the judgement of this matter to doctors or to any other skilled worker except him who has knowledge of what is to be dreaded and what is not the man whom I call courageous.
Socrates
Do you comprehend his meaning, Laches.
Laches
I do: it seems to be the seers whom he calls the courageous: for who else can know for which of us it is better to be alive than dead.
And yet, Nicias, do you avow yourself to be a seer, or to be neither a seer nor courageous.
Nicias
What.
Is it now a seer, think you, who has the gift of judging what is to be dreaded and what to be dared.
Laches
That is my view: who else could it be.
Nicias
Much rather the man of whom I speak, my dear sir: for the seer's business is to judge only the signs of what is yet to come whether a man is to meet with death or disease or loss of property, or victory or defeat in war or some other contest; but what is better among these things for a man to suffer or avoid suffering, can surely be no more for a seer to decide than for anyone else in the world.
Laches
Well, I fail to follow him, Socrates, or to see what he is driving at; for he points out that neither a seer nor a doctor nor anybody else is the man he refers to as the courageous, unless perchance he means it is some god.
Now it appears to me that Nicias is unwilling to admit honestly that he has no meaning at all, but dodges this way and that in the hope of concealing his own perplexity.
Why, you and I could have dodged in the same way just now, if we wished to avoid the appearance of contradicting ourselves.
Of course, if we were arguing in a law-court, there would be some reason for so doing; but here, in a meeting like this of ours, why waste time in adorning oneself with empty words.
Socrates
I agree that it is out of place, Laches: but let us see: perhaps Nicias thinks he does mean something, and is not talking just for the sake of talking.
So let us ask him to explain more clearly what is in his mind; and if we find that he means something, we will agree with him; if not, we will instruct him.
Laches
Then, Socrates, if you would like to ask him, please do so: I daresay I have done enough asking.
Socrates
Well, I see no objection, since the question will be on behalf of us both.
Laches
Very well, then.
Socrates
Now tell me, Nicias, or rather, tell us for Laches and I are sharing the argument between us do you say that courage is knowledge of what is to be dreaded or dared.
Nicias
I do.
Socrates
And that it is not every man that knows it, since neither a doctor nor a seer can know it, and cannot be courageous unless he add this particular knowledge to his own.
This was your statement, was it not.
Nicias
Yes, it was.
Socrates
And so in fact this is not a thing which, as the proverb says, "any pig would know"; and thus a pig cannot be courageous.
Nicias
I think not.
Socrates
Indeed it is obvious, Nicias, that you at least do not believe that even the Crommyonian sow could have been courageous.
I say this not in jest, but because I conceive it is necessary for him who states this theory to refuse courage to any wild beast, or else to admit that a beast like a lion or a leopard or even a boar is so wise as to know what only a few men know because it is so hard to perceive.
Why, he who subscribes to your account of courage must needs agree that a lion, a stag, a bull, and a monkey have all an equal share of courage in their nature.
Laches
Heavens, Socrates, how admirably you argue.
Now answer us sincerely, Nicias, and say whether those animals, which we all admit to be courageous, are wiser than we are; or whether you dare, in contradiction of everyone else, describe them as not even courageous.
Nicias
No, Laches, I do not describe animals, or anything else that from thoughtlessness has no fear of the dreadful, as courageous, but rather as fearless and foolish.
Or do you suppose I describe all children as courageous, that have no fear because they are thoughtless.
I rather hold that the fearless and the courageous are not the same thing.
In my opinion very few people are endowed with courage and forethought, while rashness, boldness, and fearlessness, with no forethought to guide it, are found in a great number of men, women, children, and animals.
So you see, the acts that you and most people call courageous, I call rash, and it is the prudent acts which I speak of that are courageous.
Laches
Mark you, Socrates, how finely, as he fancies, my friend decks himself out with his words.
And how he attempts to deprive of the distinction of courage those whom everyone admits to be courageous.
Nicias
I am not referring to you, Laches, so do not be fiightened: for I grant that you, and Lamachus also, are wise, since you are courageous, and I say the same of numerous other Athenians.
Laches
I will not say what I could say in answer to that, lest you call me a true son of Aexone.
Socrates
No, say nothing, Laches: for in fact you seem to me to have failed to perceive that he has acquired his wisdom from Damon, our good friend; and Damon constantly associates with Prodicus, who is supposed to be the cleverest of the sophists at distinguishing terms like these.
Laches
Yes, for it is more suitable, Socrates, for a sophist to make a show of such refinements than for a man whom the State thinks worthy to govern her.
Socrates
Indeed it is suitable, I presume, my amiable friend, for a man in the highest seat of government to be gifted with the highest degree of wisdom.
But it seems to me that Nicias is worthy of further attention, so that we may learn in what connexion he uses this word "courage."
Laches
Then attend to him yourself, Socrates.
Socrates
That is what I propose to do, my good sir: still, you are not to think that I will release you from your due share of the argument.
No, you must put your mind to it and join in weighing well what is said.
Laches
Well, so be it, if you think that I ought.
Socrates
Indeed I do.
Now, Nicias, please go back to the beginning and answer us: you know we started our discussion by considering courage as a part of virtue.
Nicias
Quite so.
Socrates
And you joined in this answer, that it is a part, there being also other parts, which taken all together have received the name of virtue.
Nicias
Why, of course.
Socrates
Now, do you mean the same as I do by these.
Besides courage, I refer to temperance, justice, and other similar qualities.
And you also, do you not.
Nicias
Certainly I do.
Socrates
So much for that; thus far we agree: but let us pass on to what is to be dreaded and what to be dared, and make sure that you and we do not take two different views of these.
Let me tell you our view of them, and if you do not agree with it, you shall instruct us.
We hold that the dreadful are things that cause fear, and the safely ventured are those that do not; and fear is caused not by past or present, but by expected evils: for fear is expectation of coming evil.
You are of the same mind with us in this, are you not, Laches.
Laches
Yes, entirely so, Socrates.
Socrates
So there you have our view, Nicias, that coming evils are to be dreaded, and things not evil, or good things, that are to come are to be safely dared.
Would you describe them in this way, or in some other.
Nicias
I would describe them in this way.
Socrates
And the knowledge of these things is what you term courage.
Nicias
Precisely.
Socrates
There is still a third point on which we must see if you are in agreement with us.
Nicias
What point is that.
Socrates
I will tell you.
It seems to your friend and me that, to take the various subjects of knowledge, there is not one knowledge of how a thing has happened in the past, another of how things are happening in the present, and another of how a thing that has not yet happened might or will happen most favorably in the future, but it is the same knowledge throughout.
For example, in the case of health, it is medicine always and alone that surveys present, past, and future processes alike; and farming is in the same position as regards the productions of the earth.
And in matters of war; I am sure you yourselves will bear me out when I say that here generalship makes the best forecasts on the whole, and particularly of future results, and is the mistress rather than the servant of the seer's art, because it knows better what is happening or about to happen in the operations of war; whence the law ordains that the general shall give orders to the seer, and not the seer to the general.
May we say this, Laches.
Laches
We may.
Socrates
Well now, do you agree with us, Nicias, that the same knowledge has comprehension of the same things, whether future, present, or past.
Nicias
I do, for that is my own opinion, Socrates.
Socrates
And courage, my good friend, is knowledge of what is to be dreaded and dared, as you say, do you not.
Nicias
Yes.
Socrates
And things to be dreaded and things to be dared have been admitted to be either future goods or future evils.
Nicias
Certainly.
Socrates
And the same knowledge is concerned with the same things, whether in the future or in any particular stage.
Nicias
That is so.
Socrates
Then courage is knowledge not merely of what is to be dreaded and what dared, for it comprehends goods and evils not merely in the future, but also in the present and the past and in any stage, like the other kinds of knowledge.
Nicias
Apparently.
Socrates
So the answer that you gave us, Nicias, covers only about a third part of courage; whereas our question was of what courage is as a whole.
And now it appears, on your own showing, that courage is knowledge not merely of what is to be dreaded and what dared, but practically a knowledge concerning all goods and evils at every stage; such is your present account of what courage must be.
What do you say to this new version, Nicias.
Nicias
I accept it, Socrates.
Socrates
Now do you think, my excellent friend, there could be anything wanting to the virtue of a man who knew all good things, and all about their production in the present, the future, and the past, and all about evil things likewise.
Do you suppose that such a man could be lacking in temperance, or justice, and holiness, when he alone has the gift of taking due precaution, in his dealings with gods and men, as regards what is to be dreaded and what is not, and of procuring good things, owing to his knowledge of the right behaviour towards them.
Nicias
I think, Socrates, there is something in what you say.
Socrates
Hence what you now describe, Nicias, will be not a part but the whole of virtue.
Nicias
Apparently.
Socrates
But, you know, we said that courage is one of the parts of virtue.
Nicias
Yes, we did.
Socrates
And what we now describe is seen to be different.
Nicias
So it seems.
Socrates
Thus we have failed to discover, Nicias, what courage really is.
Nicias
Evidently.
Laches
And I, in fact, supposed, my dear Nicias, that you were going to discover it, when you showed such contempt for the answers I made to Socrates: indeed I had very great hopes that the wisdom you derived from Damon would avail you for the discovery.
Nicias
That is all very fine, Laches; you think you can now make light of the fact that you were yourself shown just now to know nothing about courage; when my turn comes to be shown up in the same light, that is all you care, and now it will not matter to you at all, it seems, if I share your ignorance of things whereof any self-respecting man ought to have knowledge.
You really strike me, indeed, as following the average man's practice of keeping an eye on others rather than on oneself: but I fancy that for the present I have said as much as could be expected on the subject of our discussion, and that later on I must make good any defects in my statement upon it with the help of Damon whom I know you choose to ridicule, and that without ever having seen the actual Damon and with others' help besides.
And when I have settled the matter I will enlighten you, in no grudging spirit: for I think you are in very great need of instruction.
Laches
You are a man of wisdom, I know, Nicias.
But still I advise Lysimachus here and Melesias to dismiss you and me, and to retain our friend Socrates as I said at first, for the education of your boys: were my own sons old enough, I should do the same thing too.
Nicias
For my part I agree; if Socrates will consent to take charge of these young people, I will seek for no one else.
I should be only too glad to entrust him with Niceratus, if he should consent: but when I begin to mention the matter to him, he always recommends other men to me and refuses himself.
Just see, Lysimachus, if Socrates will give you a more favorable hearing.
Lysimachus
It is only right that he should, Nicias, for indeed I would be willing to do many things for him which I would not do for a great many others.
Well, what do you say, Socrates.
Will you comply, and lend your endeavours for the highest improvement of these boys.
Socrates
Why, how strange it would be, Lysimachus, to refuse to lend one's endeavours for the highest improvement of anybody.
Now if in the debates that we have just held I had been found to know what our two friends did not know, it would be right to make a point of inviting me to take up this work: but as it is, we have all got into the same difficulty, so why should one of us be preferred to another.
In my own opinion, none of us should; and this being so, perhaps you will allow me to give you a piece of advice.
I tell you, gentlemen and this is confidential that we ought all alike to seek out the best teacher we can find, first for ourselves for we need one and then for our boys, sparing neither expense nor anything else we can do: but to leave ourselves as we now are, this I do not advise.
And if anyone makes fun of us for seeing fit to go to school at our time of life, I think we should appeal to Homer,
who said that shame is no good mate for a needy man.
So let us not mind what anyone may say, but join together in arraging for our own and the boys' tuition.
Lysimachus
I gladly approve of your suggestions, Socrates; and as I am the oldest, so I am the most eager to have lessons with the young ones.
Now this is what I ask you to do: come to my house tomorrow at daybreak; be sure not to fail, and then we shall consult on this very matter.
For the present, let us break up our meeting.
Socrates
I will not fail, Lysimachus, to come to you tomorrow, God willing.
Lysis
Socrates
I was making my way from the Academy straight to the Lyceum, by the road outside the town wall, just under the wall; and when I reached the little gate that leads to the spring of Panops, I chanced there upon Hippothales, son of Hieronymus, and Ctesippus of Paeania, and some other youths with them, standing in a group together.
Then Hippothales, as he saw me approaching, said: Socrates, whither away, and whence.
From the Academy, I replied, on my way straight to the Lyceum.
Come over here, he said, straight to us.
You will not put in here.
But you may as well.
Where do you mean, I asked; and what is your company.
Here, he said, showing me there, just opposite the wall, a sort of enclosure and a door standing open.
We pass our time there, he went on; not only we ourselves, but others besides, a great many, and handsome.
And what, pray, is this place, and what your pastime.
A wrestling school, he said, of recent construction; and our pastime chiefly consists of discussions, in which we should be happy to let you have a share.
That is very good of you, I said; and who does the teaching there.
Your own comrade, he replied, and supporter, Miccus.
Upon my word, I said, he is no slight person, but a qualified professor.
Then will you please come in with us, he said, so as to see for yourself the company we have there.
I should be glad to hear first on what terms I am to enter, and which is the handsome one.
Each of us, he replied, has a different fancy, Socrates.
Well, and which is yours, Hippothales.
Tell me that.
At this question he blushed;
so I said: Ah, Hippothales, son of Hieronymus, you need not trouble to tell me whether you are in love with somebody or not: for I know you are not only in love, but also far advanced already in your passion.
In everything else I may be a poor useless creature, but there is one gift that I have somehow from heaven, to be able to recognize quickly a lover or a beloved.
When he heard this, he blushed much more than ever.
Then Ctesippus remarked: Quite charming, the way you blush, Hippothales, and shrink from telling Socrates the name; yet, if he spends but a little time with you, he will find you a regular torment, as he hears you repeat it again and again.
He has deafened our ears, I can tell you, Socrates, by cramming them with "Lysis": let him be a trifle in liquor, and as likely as not we start out of our sleep fancying we hear the name of Lysis.
The descriptions he gives us in conversation, though dreadful enough, are not so very bad: it is when he sets about inundating us with his poems and prose compositions.
More dreadful than all, he actually sings about his favorite in an extraordinary voice, which we have the trial of hearing.
And now, at a question from you, he blushes.
Lysis apparently, I said, is somebody quite young: this I infer from the fact that I did not recognize the name when I heard it.
That is because they do not usually call him by his name, he replied; he still goes by his paternal title, as his father is so very well known.
You must, I am sure, be anything but ignorant of the boy's appearance: that alone would be enough to know him by.
Let me hear, I said, whose son he is.
The eldest son, he replied, of Democrates of Aexone.
Ah well, I said, Hippothales, what an altogether noble and gallant love you have discovered there.
Now please go on and give me a performance like those that you give your friends here, so that I may know whether you understand what a lover ought to say of his favorite to his face or to others.
Do you attach any weight, Socrates, he asked, to anything you have heard this fellow say.
Tell me, I said; do you deny being in love with the person he mentions.
Not I, he replied; but I do deny that I make poems and compositions on my favorite.
He is in a bad way, said Ctesippus; why, he raves like a madman.
Then I remarked: Hippothales, I do not want to hear your verses, or any ode that you may have indited to the youth; I only ask for their purport, that I may know your manner of dealing with your favorite.
I expect this fellow will tell you, he replied: he has an accurate knowledge and recollection of them, if there is any truth in what he says of my having dinned them so constantly in his ears.
Quite so, on my soul, said Ctesippus;
and a ridiculous story it is too, Socrates.
To be a lover, and to be singularly intent on one's boy, yet to have nothing particular to tell him that a mere boy could not say, is surely ridiculous:
but he only writes and relates things that the whole city sings of, recalling Democrates and the boy's grandfather Lysis and all his ancestors, with their wealth and the horses they kept, and their victories at Delphi, the Isthmus, and Nemea, with chariot-teams and coursers, and, in addition, even hoarier antiquities than these.
Only two days ago he was recounting to us in some poem of his the entertainment of Hercules, how on account of his kinship with Hercules their forefather welcomed the hero, being himself the offspring of Zeus and of the daughter of their deme's founder; such old wives' tales, and many more of the sort, Socrates, these are the things he tells and trolls, while compelling us to be his audience.
When I heard this I said: Oh, you ridiculous Hippothales, do you compose and chant a triumph song on yourself, before you have won your victory.
It is not on myself, Socrates, he replied, that I either compose or chant it.
You think not, I said.
Then what is the truth of it.
he asked.
Most certainly, I replied, it is you to whom these songs refer.
For if you prevail on your favorite, and he is such as you describe, all that you have spoken and sung will be so much glory to you, and a veritable eulogy upon your triumph in having secured such a favorite as that: whereas if he eludes your grasp, the higher the terms of your eulogy of your favorite, the greater will seem to be the charms and virtues you have lost, and you will be ridiculed accordingly.
Hence anyone who deals wisely in love-matters, my friend, does not praise his beloved until he prevails, for fear of what the future may have in store for him.
And besides, these handsome boys, when so praised and extolled, become full of pride and haughtiness: do you not think so.
I do, he said.
And then, the haughtier they are, the harder grows the task of capturing them.
Yes, apparently.
And what do you think of a hunter who should scare away his quarry in hunting and make it harder to catch.
Clearly he would be a poor one.
And hence to use speech and song, not for charming but for driving wild, would be gross fatuity, would it not.
I think so.
Then take care, Hippothales, not to make yourself guilty of all these things by your verse-making; and yet I fancy you will not like to allow that a man who damages himself by poetry can be a good poet, so long as he is damaging to himself.
On my soul, no, he said; of course it would be most absurd.
But this is the very reason, Socrates, why I impart my feelings to you, and ask you for any useful advice you can give as to what conversation or conduct will help to endear one to one's favorite.
That is not an easy thing to tell, I replied; but if you will agree to get him to have a talk with me, I daresay I could show you an example of the conversation you should hold with him, instead of those things that your friends say you speak and sing.
There is no difficulty about that, he said.
If you will go in with Ctesippus here, and take a seat and talk, I think he will come to you of his own accord; he is singularly fond of listening, Socrates, and besides, they are keeping the Hermaea, so that the youths and boys are all mingled together.
So he will come to you but if he does not, Ctesippus is intimate with him, as being a cousin of Menexenus; for Lysis has chosen Menexenus for his particular friend.
So let Ctesippus call him if you find that he does not come of himself.
That is what I must do, I said.
Whereupon I took Ctesippus with me into the wrestling school, and the others came after us.
When we got inside, we found that the boys had performed the sacrifice in the place and, as the ceremonial business was now almost over, they were all playing at knuckle-bones and wearing their finest attire.
Most of them were playing in the court out-of-doors; but some were at a game of odd-and-even in a corner of the undressing room, with a great lot of knuckle-bones which they drew from little baskets; and there were others standing about them and looking on.
Among these was Lysis: he stood among the boys and youths with a garland on his head, a distinguished figure, deserving not merely the name of well-favored, but also of well-made and well-bred.
As for us, we went and sat apart on the opposite side for it was quiet there and started some talk amongst ourselves.
The result was that Lysis ever and anon turned round to observe us, and was obviously eager to join us.
For a while, however, he hesitated, being too shy to approach us alone; till Menexenus stepped in for a moment from his game in the court and, on seeing me and Ctesippus, came to take a seat beside us.
When Lysis saw him, he came along too and sat down with Menexenus.
Then all the others came to us also; and I must add that Hippothales, when he saw a good many of them standing there, stood so as to be screened by them, in a position where he thought Lysis would not catch sight of him, as he feared that he might irritate him; in this way he stood by and listened.
Then I, looking at Menexenus, asked him: Son of Demophon, which is the elder of you two.
It is a point in dispute between us, he replied.
Then you must also be at variance, I said, as to which is the nobler.
Yes, to be sure, he said.
And moreover, which is the more beautiful, likewise.
This made them both laugh.
But of course I shall not ask, I said, which of you is the wealthier; for you are friends, are you not.
Certainly we are, they replied.
And, you know, friends are said to have everything in common, so that here at least there will be no difference between you, if what you say of your friendship is true.
They agreed.
After that I was proceeding to ask them which was the juster and wiser of the two,
when I was interrupted by somebody who came and fetched away Menexenus, saying that the wrestling-master was calling him: I understood that he was taking some part in the rites.
So he went off; and then I asked Lysis: I suppose, Lysis, your father and mother are exceedingly fond of you.
Yes, to be sure, he replied.
Then they would like you to be as happy as possible.
Yes, of course.
Do you consider that a man is happy when enslaved and restricted from doing everything he desires.
Not I, on my word, he said.
Then if your father and mother are fond of you, and desire to see you happy, it is perfectly plain that they are anxious to secure your happiness.
They must be, of course, he said.
Hence they allow you to do what you like, and never scold you, or hinder you from doing what you desire.
Yes, they do, Socrates, I assure you: they stop me from doing a great many things.
How do you mean.
I said:
they wish you to be happy, and yet hinder you from doing what you like.
But answer me this:
suppose you desire to ride in one of your father's chariots and hold the reins in some race; they will not allow you, but will prevent you.
That is so, to be sure, he said; they will not allow me.
But whom would they allow.
There is a driver, in my father's pay.
What do you say.
A hireling, whom they trust rather than you, so that he can do whatever he pleases with the horses; and they pay him besides a salary for doing that.
Why, of course, he said.
Well, but they trust you with the control of the mule-cart, and if you wanted to take the whip and lash the team, they would let you.
Nothing of the sort, he said.
Why, I asked, is nobody allowed to lash them.
Oh yes, he said, the muleteer.
Is he a slave, or free.
A slave, he replied.
So it seems that they value a slave more highly than you, their son, and entrust him rather than you with their property, and allow him to do what he likes, while preventing you.
And now there is one thing more you must tell me.
Do they let you control your own self, or will they not trust you in that either.
Of course they do not, he replied.
But some one controls you.
Yes, he said, my tutor here.
Is he a slave.
Why, certainly;
he belongs to us, he said.
What a strange thing, I exclaimed; a free man controlled by a slave.
But how does this tutor actually exert his control over you.
By taking me to school, I suppose, he replied.
And your schoolmasters, can it be that they also control you.
I should think they do.
Then quite a large number of masters and controllers are deliberately set over you by your father.
But when you come home to your mother, she surely lets you do what you like, that she may make you happy, either with her wool or her loom, when she is weaving.
I take it she does not prevent you from handling her batten, or her comb, or any other of her wool-work implements.
At this he laughed and said: I promise you, Socrates, not only does she prevent me, but I should get a beating as well, if I laid hands on them.
Good heavens.
I said;
Well, what reason can they have for so strangely preventing you from being happy and doing what you like.
Why do they maintain you all day long in constant servitude to somebody, so that, in a word, you do hardly a single thing that you desire.
And thus, it would seem, you get no advantage from all your great possessions nay, anyone else controls them rather than you nor from your own person, though so well-born, which is also shepherded and managed by another; while you, Lysis, control nobody, and do nothing that you desire.
It is because I am not yet of age, Socrates, he said.
That can hardly be the hindrance, son of Democrates, since there is a certain amount, I imagine, that your father and mother entrust to you without waiting until you come of age.
For when they want some reading or writing done for them, it is you, I conceive, whom they appoint to do it before any others of the household.
Is it not so.
Quite so, he replied.
And you are free there to choose which letter you shall write first and which second, and you have a like choice in reading.
And, I suppose, when you take your lyre, neither your father nor your mother prevents you from tightening or slackening what string you please, or from using your finger or your plectrum at will:
or do they prevent you.
Oh, no.
Then whatever can be the reason, Lysis, why they do not prevent you here, while in the matters we were just mentioning they do.
I suppose, he said, because I understand these things, but not those others.
Very well, I said, my excellent friend: so it is not your coming of age that your father is waiting for, as the time for entrusting you with everything; but on the day when he considers you to have a better intelligence than himself, he will entrust you with himself and all that is his.
Yes, I think so, he said.
Very well, I went on, but tell me, does not your neighbor observe the same rule as your father towards you.
Do you think he will entrust you with the management of his house, as soon as he considers you to have a better idea of its management than himself, or will he direct it himself.
I should say he would entrust it to me.
Well then, do you not think that the Athenians will entrust you with their affairs, when they perceive that you have sufficient intelligence.
I do.
Ah, do let me ask this, I went on: what, pray, of the Great King.
Would he allow his eldest son, heir-apparent to the throne of Asia, to put what he chose into the royal stew, or would he prefer us to do it, supposing we came before him and convinced him that we had a better notion than his son of preparing a tasty dish.
Clearly he would prefer us, he said.
And he would not allow the prince to put in the smallest bit, whereas he would let us have our way even if we wanted to put in salt by the handful.
Why, of course.
Again, if his son has something the matter with his eyes, would he let him meddle with them himself, if he considered him to be no doctor, or would he prevent him.
He would prevent him.
But if he supposed us to have medical skill, he would not prevent us, I imagine, even though we wanted to pull the eyes open and sprinkle them with ashes, so long as he believed our judgement to be sound.
That is true.
So he would entrust us, rather than himself or his son, with all his other affairs besides, wherever he felt we were more skilled than they.
Necessarily, he said, Socrates.
The case then, my dear Lysis, I said, stands thus: with regard to matters in which we become intelligent, every one will entrust us with them, whether Greeks or foreigners, men or women and in such matters we shall do as we please, and nobody will care to obstruct us.
Nay, not only shall we ourselves be free and have control of others in these affairs, but they will also belong to us, since we shall derive advantage from them; whereas in all those for which we have failed to acquire intelligence, so far will anyone be from permitting us to deal with them as we think fit, that everybody will do his utmost to obstruct us not merely strangers, but father and mother and any more intimate person than they; and we on our part shall be subject to others in such matters, which will be no concern of ours, since we shall draw no advantage from them.
Do you agree to this account of the case.
I agree.
Then will anyone count us his friends or have any affection for us in those matters for which we are useless.
Surely not, he said.
So now, you see, your father does not love you, nor does anyone love anyone else, so far as one is useless.
Apparently not, he said.
Then if you can become wise, my boy, everybody will be your friend, every one will be intimate with you, since you will be useful and good; otherwise, no one at all, not your father, nor your mother, nor your intimate connections, will be your friends.
Now is it possible, Lysis, to have a high notion of yourself in matters of which you have as yet no notion.
Why, how can I.
he said.
Then if you are in need of a teacher, you have as yet no notion of things.
True.
Nor can you have a great notion of yourself, if you are still notionless.
Upon my word, Socrates, he said, I do not see how I can.
On hearing him answer this, I glanced at Hippothales, and nearly made a blunder, for it came into my mind to say: This is the way, Hippothales, in which you should talk to your favorite, humbling and reducing him, instead of puffing him up and spoiling him, as you do now.
Well, I noticed that he was in an agony of embarrassment at what we had been saying, and I remembered how, in standing near, he wished to hide himself from Lysis.
So I checked myself and withheld this remark.
In the meantime, Menexenus came back, and sat down by Lysis in the place he had left on going out.
Then Lysis, in a most playful, affectionate manner, unobserved by Menexenus, said softly to me: Socrates, tell Menexenus what you have been saying to me.
To which I replied: You shall tell it him yourself, Lysis; for you gave it your closest attention.
I did, indeed, he said.
Then try, I went on, to recollect it as well as you can, so that you tell him the whole of it clearly: but if you forget any of it, mind that you ask me for it again when next you meet me.
I will do so, Socrates, he said, by all means, I assure you.
But tell him something else, that I may hear it too, until it is time to go home.
Well, I must do so, I said, since it is you who bid me.
But be ready to come to my support, in case Menexenus attempts to refute me.
You know what a keen disputant he is.
Yes, on my word, very keen; that is why I want you to have a talk with him.
So that I may make myself ridiculous I said.
No, no, indeed, he replied I want you to trounce him.
How can I.
I asked.
It is not easy, when the fellow is so formidable a pupil of Ctesippus.
And here do you not see.
is Ctesippus himself.
Take no heed of anyone, Socrates, he said; just go on and have a talk with him.
I must comply, I said.
Now, as these words passed between us, What is this feast, said Ctesippus, that you two are having by yourselves, without allowing us a share in your talk.
Well, well, I replied, we must give you a share.
My friend here fails to understand something that I have been saying, but tells me he thinks Menexenus knows, and he urges me to question him.
Why not ask him then said he.
But I am going to, I replied.
Now please answer, Menexenus, whatever question I may ask you.
There is a certain possession that I have desired from my childhood, as every one does in his own way.
One person wants to get possession of horses, another dogs, another money, and another distinctions: of these things I reck little, but for the possession of friends I have quite a passionate longing, and would rather obtain a good friend than the best quail or cock in the world; yes, and rather, I swear, than any horse or dog.
I believe, indeed, by the Dog, that rather than all Darius's gold I would choose to gain a dear comrade far sooner than I would Darius himself, so fond I am of my comrades.
Accordingly, when I see you and Lysis together, I am quite beside myself, and congratulate you on being able, at such an early age, to gain this possession so quickly and easily; since you, Menexenus, have so quickly and surely acquired his friendship, and he likewise yours: whereas I am so far from acquiring such a thing, that I do not even know in what way one person becomes a friend of another, and am constrained to ask you about this very point, in view of your experience.
Now tell me: when one person loves another, which of the two becomes friend of the other the loving of the loved, or the loved of the loving.
Or is there no difference.
There is none, he replied, in my opinion.
How is that.
I said; do you mean that both become friends mutually, when there is only one loving the other.
Yes, I think so, he replied.
But I ask you, is it not possible for one loving not to be loved by him whom he loves.
It is.
But again, may he not be even hated while loving.
This, I imagine, is the sort of thing that lovers do sometimes seem to incur with their favorites: they love them with all their might, yet they feel either that they are not loved in return, or that they are actually hated.
Or do you not think this is true.
Very true, he replied.
Now in such a case, I went on, the one loves and the other is loved.
Yes.
Which of the two, then, is a friend of the other.
Is the loving a friend of the loved, whether in fact he is loved in return or is even hated, or is the loved a friend of the loving.
Or again, is neither of them in such a case friend of the other, if both do not love mutually.
At any rate, he said, it looks as if this were so.
So you see, we now hold a different view from what we held before.
At first we said that if one of them loved, both were friends: but now, if both do not love, neither is a friend.
It looks like it, he said.
So there is no such thing as a friend for the lover who is not loved in return.
Apparently not.
And so we find no horse-lovers where the horses do not love in return, no quail-lovers, dog-lovers, wine-lovers, or sport-lovers on such terms, nor any lovers of wisdom if she returns not their love.
Or does each person love these things, while yet failing to make friends of them, and was it a lying poet who said "Happy to have your children as friends, and your trampling horses,
Scent-snuffing hounds, and a host when you travel abroad."
I do not think so, he said.
But do you think he spoke the truth.
Yes.
Then the loved object is a friend to the lover, it would seem, Menexenus, alike whether it loves or hates: for instance, new-born children, who have either not begun to love, or already hate, if punished by their mother or their father, are yet at that very moment, and in spite of their hate, especially and pre-eminently friends to their parents.
I think, he said, that is the case.
Then this argument shows that it is not the lover who is a friend, but the loved.
Apparently.
And it is the hated who is an enemy, not the hater.
Evidently.
Then people must often be loved by their enemies, and hated by their friends, and be friends to their enemies and enemies to their friends, if the loved object is a friend rather than the loving agent.
And yet it is a gross absurdity, my dear friend I should say rather, an impossibility that one should be an enemy to one's friend and a friend to one's enemy.
You appear to be right there, Socrates, he said.
Then if that is impossible, it is the loving that must be a friend of the loved.
Evidently.
And so the hating, on the other hand, will be an enemy of the hated.
Necessarily.
Hence in the end we shall find ourselves compelled to agree to the same statement as we made before, that frequently a man is a friend of one who is no friend, and frequently even of an enemy, when he loves one who loves not, or even hates; while frequently a man may be an enemy of one who is no enemy or even a friend, when he hates one who hates not, or even loves.
It looks like it, he said.
What then are we to make of it, I asked, if neither the loving are to be friends, nor the loved, nor both the loving and loved together.
For apart from these, are there any others left for us to cite as becoming friends to one another.
For my part, Socrates, he said, I declare I can see no sort of shift.
Can it be, Menexenus, I asked, that all through there has been something wrong with our inquiry.
I think there has, Socrates, said Lysis, and blushed as soon as he said it; for it struck me that the words escaped him unintentionally, through his closely applying his mind to our talk as he had noticeably done all the time he was listening.
So then, as I wanted to give Menexenus a rest, and was delighted with the other's taste for philosophy, I took occasion to shift the discussion over to Lysis, and said: Lysis, I think your remark is true, that if we were inquiring correctly we could never have gone so sadly astray.
Well, let us follow our present line no further, since our inquiry looks to me a rather hard sort of path: I think we had best make for the point where we turned off, and be guided by the poets; for they are our fathers, as it were, and conductors in wisdom.
They, of course, express themselves in no mean sort on the subject of friends, where they happen to be found; even saying that God himself makes them friends by drawing them to each other.
The way they put it, I believe, is something like this:"Yea, ever like and like together God doth draw,"
and so brings them acquainted; or have you not come across these verses.
Yes, I have, he replied.
And you have also come across those writings of eminent sages, which tell us this very thing that like must needs be always friend to like.
I refer, of course, to those who debate or write about nature and the universe.
Quite so, he said.
Well now, I went on, are they right in what they say.
Perhaps, he replied.
Perhaps in one half of it, I said; perhaps in even the whole; only we do not comprehend it.
We suppose that the nearer a wicked man approaches to a wicked man, and the more he consorts with him, the more hateful he becomes;
for he injures him, and we consider it impossible that injurer and injured should be friends.
Is it not so.
Yes, he answered.
On this showing, therefore, half of the saying cannot be true, if the wicked are like one another.
Quite so.
What I believe they mean is that the good are like one another, and are friends, while the bad as is also said of them are never like even their own selves, being so ill-balanced and unsteady; and when a thing is unlike itself and variable it can hardly become like or friend to anything else.
You must surely agree to that.
I do, he said.
Hence I conclude there is a hidden meaning, dear friend, intended by those who say that like is friend to like, namely that the good alone is friend to the good alone, while the bad never enters into true friendship with either good or bad.
Do you agree.
He nodded assent.
So now we can tell what friends are; since our argument discloses that they are any persons who may be good.
I quite think so, said he.
And I also, said I;
and yet there is a point in it that makes me uneasy: so come, in Heaven's name, let us make out what it is that I suspect.
like friend to like in so far as he is like, and is such an one useful to his fellow.
Let me put it another way: when anything whatever is like anything else, what benefit can it offer, or what harm can it do, to its like, which it could not offer or do to itself.
Or what could be done to it that could not be done to it by itself.
How can such things be cherished by each other, when they can bring no mutual succor.
Is it at all possible.
It is not.
And how can that be a friend, which is not cherished.
By no means.
But, granting that like is not friend to like, the good may still be friend to the good in so far as he is good, not as he is like.
Perhaps.
But again, will not the good, in so far as he is good, be in that measure sufficient for himself.
Yes.
And the sufficient has no need of anything, by virtue of his sufficiency.
Of course.
And if a man has no need of anything he will not cherish anything.
Presumably not.
And that which does not cherish will not love.
I should think not.
And one who loves not is no friend.
Evidently.
So how can we say that the good will be friends to the good at all, when neither in absence do they long for one another for they are sufficient for themselves even when apart nor in presence have they need of one another.
How can it be contrived that such persons shall value each other highly.
By no means, he said.
And if they do not set a high value on each other, they cannot be friends.
True.
Now observe, Lysis, how we are missing the track.
Can it be, indeed, that we are deceived in the whole matter.
How so.
he asked.
Once on a time I heard somebody say, and I have just recollected it, that like was most hostile to like, and so were good men to good men; and what is more, he put forward Hesiod as witness, by quoting his words "See potter wroth with potter, bard with bard,
and Beggar with beggar,
and in all other cases it was the same, he said; likest things must needs be filled with envy, contention, and hatred against each other, but the unlikest things with friendship: since the poor man must needs be friendly to the rich, and the weak to the strong, for the sake of assistance, and also the sick man to the doctor; and every ignorant person had to cherish the well-informed, and love him.
And then the speaker pursued his theme to this further and more imposing point that like could not in the slightest degree be friendly to like, but was in just the opposite case: for it was between things most opposed that friendship was chiefly to be found, since everything desired its opposite, not its like.
Thus dry desired wet, cold hot, bitter sweet, sharp blunt, empty fullness, full emptiness, and likewise the rest on the same principle:
for the opposite was food for its opposite, as the like could have no enjoyment of its like.
And I must say, my good friend, his argument seemed a smart one, for he expressed it well.
But you, I asked how does it strike you.
It sounds all right, said Menexenus, at least on the moment's hearing.
Then are we to say that the opposite is most friendly to its opposite.
Certainly.
Well, I exclaimed, is it not monstrous, Menexenus.
Why, at once these all-accomplished logic-choppers will delightedly pounce on us and ask whether hatred is not the most opposite thing to friendship.
And what answer shall we give them.
Shall we not be forced to admit that what they say is true.
We shall.
So then, they will demand, is a hating thing friend to the friendly thing, or the friendly to the hating.
Neither, he replied.
But is the just a friend to the unjust, or the temperate to the profligate, or the good to the bad.
I do not think that could be so.
But yet, I urged, if one thing is friend to another on this principle of opposition, these things too must needs be friends.
They must.
So neither is like friend to like, nor opposite friend to opposite.
It seems not.
But there is still this point to consider; for perhaps we are yet more mistaken, and the friendly has really nothing to do with all this: it may rather be something neither good nor bad that will prove after all to be what we call friend of the good.
How do you mean he asked.
For the life of me, I said, I cannot tell: the fact is, I am quite dizzy myself with the puzzle of our argument, and am inclined to agree with the ancient proverb that the beautiful is friendly.
It certainly resembles something soft and smooth and sleek; that is why, I daresay, it so easily slides and dives right into us, by virtue of those qualities.
For I declare that the good is beautiful: do you not agree.
I do.
Then I will be a diviner for once, and state that what is neither good nor bad is friendly to what is beautiful and good; and what it is that prompts me to this divination, you must now hear.
My view is that there are three separate kinds, as it were the good, the bad, and what is neither good nor bad; and what is yours.
Mine is the same, he replied.
And that neither is the good friendly to the good, nor the bad to the bad, nor the good to the bad; so much our previous argument already forbids.
One view then remains: if anything is friendly to anything, that which is neither good nor bad is friendly to either the good or what is of the same quality as itself.
For I presume nothing could be found friendly to the bad.
True.
Nor, however, can like be friendly to like: this we stated just now, did we not.
Yes.
So what is neither good nor bad can have no friendship with the same sort of thing as itself.
Apparently not.
Then only what is neither good nor bad proves to be friendly to the good, and to that only.
That must be so, it seems.
Then can we rely further on this present statement, my boys, I said, as a sure guide.
For instance, we have only to consider a body in health to see that it has no need of doctoring or assistance: it is well enough as it is, and so no one in health is friend to a doctor, on account of his health.
You agree.
No one.
But the sick man is, I imagine, on account of his disease.
Certainly.
Now disease is a bad thing, and medicine is beneficial and good.
Yes.
And a body, of course, taken as body, is neither good nor bad.
That is so.
But a body is compelled by disease to welcome and love medicine.
I think so.
Thus what is neither bad nor good becomes a friend of the good because of the presence of evil.
So it seems.
But clearly this must be before it is itself made evil by the evil which it has;
for surely, when once it has been made evil, it can no longer have any desire or love for the good; since we agreed it was impossible for bad to be a friend of good.
Yes, impossible.
Now observe what I say.
Some things are of the same sort as those that are present with them, and some are not.
For example, if you chose to dye something a certain color, the substance of the dye is present, I presume, with the thing dyed.
Certainly.
Then is the thing dyed of the same sort, in point of color, as the substance that is added.
I do not understand, he said.
Well, try it this way, I went on:
suppose some one tinged your golden locks with white lead, would they then be or appear to be white.
Yes, they would so appear, he replied.
And, in fact, whiteness would be present with them.
Yes.
But all the same they would not be any the more white as yet; for though whiteness be present, they are not at all white, any more than they are at all black.
True.
But when, my dear boy, old age has cast that same color upon them, they have then come to be of the same sort as that which is present white through presence of white.
To be sure.
So this is the question I have been trying to put to you whether a thing that has something present with it is to be held of the same sort as that present thing or only when that thing is present in a particular way, but otherwise not.
More likely the latter, he said.
So that what is neither bad nor good is sometimes, when bad is present, not bad as yet, and such cases have been known to occur.
Certainly.
When therefore it is not bad as yet, though bad is present, this presence makes it desire good; but the presence which makes it bad deprives it equally of its desire and its love for the good.
For it is no longer neither bad nor good, but bad; and we found that bad was no friend to good.
No, indeed.
And consequently we may say that those who are already wise no longer love wisdom, whether they be gods or men; nor again can those be lovers of wisdom who are in such ignorance as to be bad: for we know that a bad and stupid man is no lover of wisdom.
And now there remain those who, while possessing this bad thing, ignorance, are not yet made ignorant or stupid, but are still aware of not knowing the things they do not know.
It follows, then, that those who are as yet neither good nor bad are lovers of wisdom, while all who are bad, and all the good, are not: for, as we found in our previous discussion, neither is opposite friend to opposite, nor like to like.
You remember, do you not.
To be sure we do, they both replied.
So now, Lysis and Menexenus, I said, we can count on having discovered what is the friendly and what is not.
For we say that, in the soul and the body and everywhere, just that which is neither bad nor good, but has the presence of bad, is thereby friend of the good.
To this statement they said that they entirely agreed.
And, beyond that, I was myself filled with delight, like a hunter, at the satisfaction of getting hold of what I was hunting;
when somehow or other a most unaccountable suspicion came over me that the conclusion to which we had agreed was not true.
So at once I exclaimed in vexation: Alack-a-day, Lysis and Menexenus.
I fear our new-gotten riches are all a dream.
said Menexenus.
I am afraid, I replied, that in our search for friendship we have struck up with arguments that are no better than a set of braggarts.
How so .
he asked.
Just consider a moment, I said.
When a man is a friend, is he friend to some one or not.
He needs be, he replied.
Then is he so for the sake of nothing and because of nothing, or for the sake of something and because of something.
For the sake of something, and because of something.
Is it a friend that thing for whose sake he is a friend to his friend or is it neither friend nor foe.
I do not quite follow, he said.
Naturally enough, said I; but perhaps you will keep up if we try it another way, and I expect that I too will better understand what I am saying.
The sick man, we said just now, is a friend to the doctor; is not that so.
Yes.
Then is it because of disease, for the sake of health, that he is a friend of the doctor.
Yes.
And disease is a bad thing.
Of course.
But what is health.
I asked: a good thing, or a bad, or neither.
A good thing, he said.
And we were saying, I believe, that the body, being neither good nor bad, was a friend of medicine that is, of a good thing because of disease that is, because of a bad thing; and it is for the sake of health that medicine has acquired this friendship, and health is a good thing.
You agree.
Yes.
Is health a friend or not.
A friend.
And disease is a foe.
Certainly.
So what is neither bad nor good is a friend to the good because of what is bad and a foe for the sake of what is good and a friend.
Apparently.
Hence the friend is a friend of its friend for the sake of its friend and because of its foe.
So it seems.
Very well, I said: since we have reached this point, my boys, let us take good heed not to be deceived.
I pass over without remark the fact that the friend has become a friend to the friend, and thus the like becomes a friend to the like, which we said was impossible.
There is, however, a further point which we must examine, if we are not to find our present argument a mere deception.
Medicine, we say, is a friend for the sake of health.
Yes.
Then is health a friend also.
Certainly.
And if it is a friend, it is so for the sake of something.
Yes.
And that something is a friend, if it is to conform to our previous agreement.
Quite so.
Then will that something be, on its part also, a friend for the sake of a friend.
Yes.
Now are we not bound to weary ourselves with going on in this way, unless we can arrive at some first principle which will not keep leading us on from one friend to another, but will reach the one original friend, for whose sake all the other things can be said to be friends.
We must.
So you see what I am afraid of that all the other things, which we cited as friends for the sake of that one thing, may be deceiving us like so many phantoms of it, while that original thing may be the veritable friend.
For suppose we view the matter thus: when a man highly values a thing, as in the common case of a father who prizes his son above all his possessions, will such a man, for the sake of placing his son before everything, value anything else highly at the same time.
For instance, on learning that he had drunk some hemlock, would he value wine highly if he believed it would save his son's life.
Why, of course, he said.
And the vessel too which contained the wine.
Certainly.
Now does he make no distinction in value, at that moment, between a cup of earthenware and his own son, or between three pints of wine and his son.
Or may we perhaps state it thus: all such concern is not entertained for the actual things which are applied for the sake of something, but for that something for whose sake all the rest are applied.
I know that we often talk of setting great value on gold and silver: but surely we are no nearer the truth of the matter for that; what we rather value above everything is the thing whatever it may prove to be for whose sake gold and all the other commodities are applied.
May we state it so.
By all means.
Then shall we not give the same account of a friend.
In speaking of all the things that are friends to us for the sake of some other friend, we find ourselves uttering a mere phrase; whereas in reality "friend" appears to be simply and solely the thing in which all these so-called friendships terminate.
So it appears, he said.
Then the real friend is a friend for the sake of nothing else that is a friend.
True.
So we have got rid of this, and it is not for the sake of some friendly thing that the friend is friendly.
But now, is the good a friend.
I should say so.
And further, it is because of the bad that the good is loved; let me state the case as follows: there are three things of which we have just been speaking good, bad, and what is neither good nor bad.
If but two of these remained after evil had been cleared away, so that it had no contact with anything, whether body or soul or any of the other things that we count neither bad nor good in themselves, would the result be that good would be of no use to us, but would have become quite a useless thing.
For if there were nothing left to harm us, we should feel no want of any assistance; and thus we should have to face the fact that it was because of the bad that we felt such a friendly affection for the good, since the good is a cure for the bad, while the bad is an ailment, and if there is no ailment there is no need for a cure.
Is not this the nature of the good to be loved because of the bad by us who are midway between the bad and the good, whereas separately and for its own sake it is of no use.
Apparently so, he said.
Then our "friend," in which all the other things terminated we called them "friends for the sake of some other friend " has no resemblance to these.
For they are described as friends for the sake of a friend: but the real friend appears to have quite the opposite character; for we found if to be a friend for the sake of a foe, and if the foe should be removed we have no friend, it seems, any more.
I should say not, he assented, to judge by our present argument.
Tell me, I beg of you, I went on, if evil is abolished, will it be impossible any longer to feel hunger or thirst or other such conditions.
Or will hunger exist, so long as men and animals exist, but without being hurtful.
Thirst, too, and all other desires will these exist without being bad, because the bad will have been abolished.
Or is this a ridiculous question as to what will exist or not exist in such a case.
For who can tell.
Yet this, at all events, we do know that, as things are now, it is possible for a man to feel hunger as a hurt, and also to be benefited by it.
You agree.
Certainly.
And so, when a man feels thirst or any other desire of the sort, he may have that desire sometimes with benefit, sometimes with harm, and sometimes with neither.
Quite so.
Now if evil things are abolished, is there any reason why the things that are not evil should be abolished along with the evil.
None.
So that those desires which are neither good nor bad will exist even when the bad things are abolished.
Apparently.
Now is it possible for a man, when he desires and loves, to have no friendly feeling towards that which he desires and loves.
I think not.
Thus certain things will continue to be friendly, it seems, when evil things are abolished.
Yes.
It cannot be that, if evil were the cause of a thing being friendly, one thing should be friendly to another when evil is abolished.
For when a cause is abolished, that thing can no longer exist, I presume, which had this as its cause.
You are right.
Now we have agreed that the friend has a friendly feeling for something and because of something; and we supposed, just then, that it was because of evil that what was neither good nor bad loved the good.
True.
But now, it seems, we make out a different cause of loving and being loved.
It seems so.
Can it really be then, as we were saying just now, that desire is the cause of friendship, and the desiring thing is a friend to what which it desires, and is so at any time of desiring; while our earlier statement about friends was all mere drivel, like a poem strung out for mere length.
It looks like it, he said.
But still, I went on, the desiring thing desires that in which it is deficient, does it not.
Yes.
And the deficient is a friend to that in which it is deficient.
I suppose so.
And it becomes deficient in that of which it suffers a deprivation.
To be sure.
So it is one's own belongings, it seems, that are the objects of love and friendship and desire; so it appears, Menexenus and Lysis.
They both agreed.
Then if you two are friends to each other by some natural bond you belong to one another.
Precisely, they said.
And in a case where one person desires another, my boys, or loves him, he would never be desiring or loving or befriending him, unless he somehow belonged to his beloved either in soul, or in some disposition, demeanor or cast of soul.
Yes, to be sure, said Menexenus; but Lysis was silent.
Very well, said I:
what belongs to us by nature has been shown to be something we needs must befriend.
It seems so, he said.
Then the genuine, not the pretended, lover must needs be befriended by his favorite.
To this Lysis and Menexenus gave but a faint nod of assent; while Hippothales, in his delight, turned all manner of colors.
So then, with the design of reviewing the argument, I proceeded: If there is any difference between what belongs and what is like, it seems to me, Lysis and Menexenus, that we might give some account of the meaning of "friend.
But if "like" and "belonging" are the same, it is not easy to get rid of our former statement, that the like is useless to the like in so far as they have likeness; and to admit that the useless is friendly would be a gross mistake.
So how if we agree now, I said, since our argument has made us quite tipsy, to say that the belonging and the like are two different things.
By all means.
Then shall we maintain that the good itself belongs to every one, while the bad is alien.
Or does the bad belong to the bad, the good to the good, and what is neither good nor bad to what is neither good nor bad.
They agreed that the last three pairs belong together.
So here again, boys, I said, we have dropped into the very statements regarding friendship which we rejected at first; for now the unjust will be as much a friend of the unjust, and the bad of the bad, as the good of the good.
So it seems, he said.
And what is more, if we say that the good and the belonging are the same, we cannot avoid making the good a friend only to the good.
To be sure.
But this again, you know, is a view of which we thought we had disabused ourselves; you remember, do you not.
We do.
So what more can we do with our argument.
Obviously, I think, nothing.
I can only ask you, accordingly, like the professional pleaders in the law courts, to perpend the whole of what has been said.
If neither the loved nor the loving, nor the like nor the unlike, nor the good nor the belonging, nor all the rest that we have tried in turn they are so many that I, for one, fail to remember any more well, if none of these is a friend, I am at a loss for anything further to say.
Having thus spoken, I was minded to stir up somebody else among the older people there; when, like spirits from another world, there came upon us the tutors of Menexenus and Lysis: they were bringing along the boys' brothers, and called out to them the order to go home; for it was getting late.
At first we tried, with the help of the group around us, to drive the tutors off; but they took no notice of us at all, and went on angrily calling, as before, in their foreign accent.
We decided that they had taken a drop too much at the festival and might be awkward customers; so we gave in to them, and broke up our party.
However, just as they were moving off, I remarked: Today, Lysis and Menexenus, we have made ourselves ridiculous I, an old man, as well as you.
For these others will go away and tell how we believe we are friends of one another for I count myself in with you but what a "friend" is, we have not yet succeeded in discovering.
Cratylus
Hermogenes
Cratylus
Socrates
Hermogenes
Here is Socrates; shall we take him as a partner in our discussion?
Cratylus
If you like.
Hermogenes
Cratylus, whom you see here, Socrates, says that everything has a right name of its own, which comes by nature, and that a name is not whatever people call a thing by agreement, just a piece of their own voice applied to the thing, but that there is a kind of inherent correctness in names, which is the same for all men, both Greeks and barbarians.
So I ask him whether his name is in truth Cratylus, and he agrees that it is.
"And what is Socrates' name?"
I said.
"Socrates," said he.
"Then that applies to all men, and the particular name by which we call each person is his name?"
And he said, "Well, your name is not Hermogenes, even if all mankind call you so."
Now, though I am asking him and am exerting myself to find out what in the world he means, he does not explain himself at all; he meets me with dissimulation, claiming to have some special knowledge of his own about it which would, if he chose to speak it out clearly, make me agree entirely with him.
Now if you could interpret Cratylus's oracular speech, I should like to hear you; or rather, I should like still better to hear, if you please, what you yourself think about the correctness of names.
Socrates
Hermogenes, son of Hipponicus, there is an ancient saying that knowledge of high things is hard to gain; and surely knowledge of names is no small matter.
Now if I had attended Prodicus's fifty-drachma course of lectures, after which, as he himself says, a man has a complete education on this subject, there would be nothing to hinder your learning the truth about the correctness of names at once; but I have heard only the one-drachma course, and so I do not know what the truth is about such matters.
However, I am ready to join you and Cratylus in looking for it.
But as for his saying that Hermogenes is not truly your name, I suspect he is making fun of you; for perhaps he thinks that you want to make money and fail every time.
But, as I said, it is difficult to know such things.
We must join forces and try to find out whether you are right, or Cratylus.
Hermogenes
For my part, Socrates, I have often talked with Cratylus and many others, and cannot come to the conclusion that there is any correctness of names other than convention and agreement.
For it seems to me that whatever name you give to a thing is its right name; and if you give up that name and change it for another, the later name is no less correct than the earlier, just as we change the names of our servants; for I think no name belongs to any particular thing by nature, but only by the habit and custom of those who employ it and who established the usage.
But if this is not the case, I am ready to hear and to learn from Cratylus or anyone else.
Socrates
It may be that you are right, Hermogenes; but let us see.
Whatever name we decide to give each particular thing is its name?
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
Whether the giver be a private person or a state?
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
Well, then, suppose I give a name to some thing or other, designating, for instance, that which we now call "man" as "horse" and that which we now call "horse" as "man," will the real name of the same thing be "man" for the public and "horse" for me individually,
and in the other case "horse" for the public and "man" for me individually?
Is that your meaning?
Hermogenes
Yes, that is my opinion.
Socrates
Now answer this question.
Is there anything which you call speaking the truth and speaking falsehood?
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
Then there would be true speech and false speech?
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
Then that speech which says things as they are is true, and that which says them as they are not is false?
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
It is possible, then, to say in speech that which is and that which is not?
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
But is true speech true only as a whole, and are its parts untrue?
Hermogenes
No, its parts also are true.
Socrates
Are the large parts true, but not the small ones, or are all true?
Hermogenes
All, in my opinion.
Socrates
Is there, then, anything which you say is a smaller part of speech than a name?
Hermogenes
No, that is the smallest.
Socrates
And the name is spoken as a part of the true speech?
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
Then it is, according to you, true.
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
And a part of false speech is false, is it not?
Hermogenes
It is.
Socrates
Then it is possible to utter either a false or a true name, since one may utter speech that is either true or false?
Hermogenes
Yes, of course.
Socrates
Then whatever each particular person says is the name of anything, that is its name for that person?
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
And whatever the number of names anyone says a thing has, it will really have that number at the time when he says it?
Hermogenes
Yes, Socrates, for I cannot conceive of any other kind of correctness in names than this; I may call a thing by one name, which I gave, and you by another, which you gave.
And in the same way, I see that states have their own different names for the same things, and Greeks differ from other Greeks and from barbarians in their use of names.
Socrates
Now, Hermogenes, let us see.
Do you think this is true of the real things, that their reality is a separate one for each person, as Protagoras said with his doctrine that man is the measure of all things that things are to me such as they seem to me, and to you such as they seem to you or do you think things have some fixed reality of their own?
Hermogenes
It has sometimes happened to me, Socrates, to be so perplexed that I have been carried away even into this doctrine of Protagoras; but I do not at all believe he is right.
Socrates
Well, have you ever been carried away so far as not to believe at all that any man is bad?
Hermogenes
Lord, no; but I have often been carried away into the belief that certain men, and a good many of them, are very bad.
Socrates
Well, did you never think any were very good?
Hermogenes
Very few.
Socrates
But you did think them so?
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
And what is your idea about that?
Are the very good very wise and the very bad very foolish?
Hermogenes
Yes, that is my opinion.
Socrates
Now if Protagoras is right and the truth is as he says, that all things are to each person as they seem to him, is it possible for some of us to be wise and some foolish?
Hermogenes
No, it is not.
Socrates
And you are, I imagine, strongly of the opinion that if wisdom and folly exist, it is quite impossible that Protagoras is right, for one man would not in reality be at all wiser than another if whatever seems to each person is really true to him.
Hermogenes
Quite right.
Socrates
But neither do you believe with Euthydemus that all things belong equally to all men at the same time and perpetually, for on this assumption also some could not be good and others bad, if virtue and its opposite were always equally possessed by all.
Hermogenes
True.
Socrates
Then if neither all things belong equally to all men at the same time and perpetually nor each thing to each man individually, it is clear that things have some fixed reality of their own, not in relation to us nor caused by us; they do not vary, swaying one way and another in accordance with our fancy, but exist of themselves in relation to their own reality imposed by nature.
Hermogenes
I think, Socrates, that is the case.
Socrates
Can things themselves, then, possess such a nature as this, and that of their actions be different?
Or are not actions also a class of realities?
Hermogenes
Certainly they are.
Socrates
Then actions also are performed according to their own nature, not according to our opinion.
For instance, if we undertake to cut anything, ought we to cut it as we wish, and with whatever instrument we wish, or shall we, if we are willing to cut each thing in accordance with the nature of cutting and being cut, and with the natural instrument, succeed in cutting it, and do it rightly, whereas if we try to do it contrary to nature we shall fail and accomplish nothing?
Hermogenes
I think the way is as you suggest.
Socrates
Then, too, if we undertake to burn anything, we must burn not according to every opinion, but according to the right one?
And that is as each thing naturally burns or is burned and with the natural instrument?
Hermogenes
True.
Socrates
And all other actions are to be performed In like manner?
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
And speaking is an action, is it not?
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
Then if a man speaks as he fancies he ought to speak, will he speak rightly, or will he succeed in speaking if he speaks in the way and with the instrument in which and with which it is natural for us to speak and for things to be spoken, whereas otherwise he will fail and accomplish nothing?
Hermogenes
I think the way you suggest is the right one.
Socrates
Now naming is a part of speaking,
for in naming I suppose people utter speech.
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
Then is not naming also a kind of action, if speaking is a kind of action concerned with things?
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
But we saw that actions are not merely relative to us, but possess a separate nature of their own?
Hermogenes
True.
Socrates
Then in naming also, if we are to be consistent with our previous conclusions, we cannot follow our own will, but the way and the instrument which the nature of things prescribes must be employed, must they not?
And if we pursue this course we shall be successful in our naming, but otherwise we shall fail.
Hermogenes
I think you are right.
Socrates
And again, what has to be cut, we said, has to be cut with something.
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
And what has to be woven, has to be woven with something,
and what has to be bored, has to be bored with something?
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
And then what has to be named, has to be named with something?
Hermogenes
True.
Socrates
And what is that with which we have to bore?
Hermogenes
A borer.
Socrates
And that with which we weave?
Hermogenes
A shuttle.
Socrates
And that with which we must name?
Hermogenes
A name.
Socrates
Right.
A name also, then, is a kind of instrument.
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
Then if I were to ask "What instrument is the shuttle?"
Is it not that with which we weave?
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
And what do we do when we weave?
Do we not separate the mingled threads of warp and woof?
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
And you could give a similar answer about the borer and the rest, could you not?
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
And can you say something of the same kind about a name?
The name being an instrument, what do we do with it when we name?
Hermogenes
I cannot tell.
Socrates
Do we not teach one another something, and separate things according to their natures?
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
A name is, then, an instrument of teaching and of separating reality, as a shuttle is an instrument of separating the web?
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
But the shuttle is an instrument of weaving?
Hermogenes
Of course.
Socrates
The weaver, then, will use the shuttle well, and well means like a weaver; and a teacher will use a name well, and well means like a teacher.
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
Whose work will the weaver use well when he uses the shuttle?
Hermogenes
The carpenter's.
Socrates
Is every one a carpenter, or he who has the skill?
Hermogenes
He who has the skill.
Socrates
And whose work will the hole-maker use when he uses the borer?
Hermogenes
The smith's.
Socrates
And is every one a smith, or he who has the skill?
Hermogenes
He who has the skill.
Socrates
And whose work will the teacher use when he uses the name?
Hermogenes
I cannot tell that, either.
Socrates
And can you not tell this, either, who gives us the names we use?
Hermogenes
No.
Socrates
Do you not think it is the law that gives them to us?
Hermogenes
Very likely.
Socrates
Then the teacher, when he uses a name, will be using the work of a lawgiver?
Hermogenes
I think so.
Socrates
Do you think every man is a lawgiver, or only he who has the skill?
Hermogenes
He who has the skill.
Socrates
Then it is not for every man, Hermogenes, to give names, but for him who may be called the name-maker; and he, it appears, is the lawgiver, who is of all the artisans among men the rarest.
Hermogenes
So it appears.
Socrates
See now what the lawgiver has in view in giving names.
Look at it in the light of what has gone before.
What has the carpenter in view when he makes a shuttle?
Is it not something the nature of which is to weave?
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
Well, then, if the shuttle breaks while he making it, will he make another with his mind fixed on that which is broken, or on that form with reference to which he was making the one which he broke?
Hermogenes
On that form, in my opinion.
Socrates
Then we should very properly call that the absolute or real shuttle?
Hermogenes
Yes, I think so.
Socrates
Then whenever he has to make a shuttle for a light or a thick garment, or for one of linen or of wool or of any kind whatsoever, all of them must contain the form or ideal of shuttle, and in each of his products he must embody the nature which is naturally best for each?
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
And the same applies to all other instruments.
The artisan must discover the instrument naturally fitted for each purpose and must embody that in the material of which he makes the instrument, not in accordance with his own will, but in accordance with its nature.
He must, it appears, know how to embody in the iron the borer fitted by nature for each special use.
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
And he must embody in the wood the shuttle fitted by nature for each kind of weaving.
Hermogenes
True.
Socrates
For each kind of shuttle is, it appears, fitted by nature for its particular kind of weaving, and the like is true of other instruments.
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
Then, my dear friend, must not the law-giver also know how to embody in the sounds and syllables that name which is fitted by nature for each object?
Must he not make and give all his names with his eye fixed upon the absolute or ideal name, if he is to be an authoritative giver of names?
And if different lawgivers do not embody it in the same syllables, we must not forget this ideal name on that account; for different smiths do not embody the form in the same iron, though making the same instrument for the same purpose, but so long as they reproduce the same ideal, though it be in different iron, still the instrument is as it should be, whether it be made here or in foreign lands, is it not?
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
On this basis, then, you will judge the law-giver, whether he be here or in a foreign land, so long as he gives to each thing the proper form of the name, in whatsoever syllables, to be no worse lawgiver, whether here or anywhere else, will you not?
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
Now who is likely to know whether the proper form of shuttle is embodied in any piece of wood?
The carpenter who made it, or the weaver who is to use it ?
Hermogenes
Probably the one who is to use it, Socrates.
Socrates
Then who is to use the work of the lyre-maker?
Is not he the man who would know best how to superintend the making of the lyre and would also know whether it is well made or not when it is finished?
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
Who is he?
Hermogenes
The lyre-player.
Socrates
And who would know best about the work of the ship-builder?
Hermogenes
The navigator.
Socrates
And who can best superintend the work of the lawgiver and judge of it when it is finished, both here and in foreign countries?
The user, is it not?
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
And is not this he who knows how to ask questions?
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
And the same one knows also how to make replies?
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
And the man who knows how to ask and answer questions you call a dialectician?
Hermogenes
Yes, that is what I call him.
Socrates
The work of the carpenter, then, is to make a rudder under the supervision of the steersman, if he rudder is to be a good one.
Hermogenes
Evidently.
Socrates
And the work of the lawgiver, as it seems, is to make a name, with the dialectician as his supervisor, if names are to be well given.
Hermogenes
True.
Socrates
Then, Hermogenes, the giving of names can hardly be, as you imagine, a trifling matter, or a task for trifling or casual persons:
and Cratylus is right in saying that names belong to things by nature and that not every one is an artisan of names, but only he who keeps in view the name which belongs by nature to each particular thing and is able to embody its form in the letters and syllables.
Hermogenes
I do not know how to answer you, Socrates; nevertheless it is not easy to change my conviction suddenly.
I think you would be more likely to convince me, if you were to show me just what it is that you say is the natural correctness of names.
Socrates
I, my dear Hermogenes, do not say that there is any.
You forget what I said a while ago, that I did not know, but would join you in looking for the truth.
And now, as we are looking, you and I, we already see one thing we did not know before, that names do possess a certain natural correctness, and that not every man knows how to give a name well to anything whatsoever.
Is not that true?
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
Then our next task is to try to find out, if you care to know about it, what kind of correctness that is which belongs to names.
Hermogenes
To be sure I care to know.
Socrates
Then investigate.
Hermogenes
How shall I investigate?
Socrates
The best way to investigate, my friend, is with the help of those who know; and you make sure of their favour by paying them money.
They are the sophists, from whom your brother Callias got his reputation for wisdom by paying them a good deal of money.
But since you have not the control of your inheritance, you ought to beg and beseech your brother to teach you the correctness which he learned of Protagoras about such matters.
Hermogenes
It would be an absurd request for me, Socrates, if I, who reject the Truth of Protagoras altogether, should desire what is said in such a Truth, as if it were of any value.
Socrates
Then if you do not like that, you ought to learn from Homer and the other poets.
Hermogenes
Why, Socrates, what does Homer say about names, and where?
Socrates
In many passages; but chiefly and most admirably in those in which he distinguishes between the names by which gods and men call the same things.
Do you not think he gives in those passages great and wonderful information about the correctness of names?
For clearly the gods call things by the names that are naturally right.
Do you not think so?
Hermogenes
Of course I know that if they call things, they call them rightly.
But what are these instances to which you refer?
Socrates
Do you not know that he says about the river in Troy which had the single combat with Hephaestus,"whom the gods call Xanthus, but men call Scamander"
Hermogenes
Oh yes.
Socrates
Well, do you not think this is a grand thing to know, that the name of that river is rightly Xanthus, rather than Scamander?
Or, if you like, do you think it is a slight thing to learn about the bird which he says "gods call chalcis, but men call cymindis,"
that it is much more correct for the same bird to be called chalcis than cymindis?
Or to learn that the hill men call Batieia is called by the gods Myrina's tomb, and many other such statements by Homer and other poets?
But perhaps these matters are too high for us to understand; it is, I think, more within human power to investigate the names Scamandrius and Astyanax, and understand what kind of correctness he ascribes to these, which he says are the names of Hector's son.
You recall, of course: the lines which contain the words to which I refer.
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
Which of the names of the boy do you imagine Homer thought was more correct, Astyanax or Scamandrius?
Hermogenes
I cannot say.
Socrates
Look at it in this way:
suppose you were asked, "Do the wise or the unwise give names more correctly?"
Hermogenes
"The wise, obviously," I should say.
Socrates
And do you think the women or the men of a city, regarded as a class in general, are the wiser?
Hermogenes
The men.
Socrates
And do you not know that Homer says the child of Hector was called Astyanax by the men of Troy; so he must have been called Scamandrius by the women, since the men called him Astyanax?
Hermogenes
Yes, probably.
Socrates
And Homer too thought the Trojan men were wiser than the women?
Hermogenes
I suppose he did.
Socrates
Then he thought Astyanax was more rightly the boy's name than Scamandrius?
Hermogenes
So it appears.
Socrates
Let us, then, consider the reason for this.
Does he not himself indicate the reason most admirably?
For he says "He alone defended their city and long walls."
Therefore, as it seems, it is right to call the son of the defender Astyanax (Lord of the city), ruler of that which his father, as Homer says, defended.
Hermogenes
That is clear to me.
Socrates
Indeed?
I do not yet understand about it myself, Hermogenes, do you?
Hermogenes
No, by Zeus, I do not.
Socrates
But, my good friend, did not Homer himself also give Hector his name?
Hermogenes
Why do you ask that?
Socrates
Because that name seems to me similar to Astyanax, and both names seem to be Greek.
For lord () and holder () mean nearly the same thing, indicating that they are names of a king; for surely a man is holder of that of which he is lord; for it is clear that he rules it and possesses it and holds it.
Or does it seem to you that there is nothing in what I am saying, and am I wrong in imagining that I have found a clue to Homer's opinion about the correctness of names?
Hermogenes
No, by Zeus, you are not wrong, in my opinion; I think perhaps you have found a clue.
Socrates
It is right, I think, to call a lion's offspring a lion and a horse's offspring a horse.
I am not speaking of prodigies, such as the birth of some other kind of creature from a horse, but of the natural offspring of each species after its kind.
If a horse, contrary to nature, should bring forth a calf, the natural offspring of a cow, it should be called a calf, not a colt, nor if any offspring that is not human should be born from a human being, should that other offspring be called a human being; and the same applies to trees and all the rest.
Do you not agree?
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
Good; but keep watch of me, and do not let me trick you;
for by the same argument any offspring of a king should be called a king; and whether the same meaning is expressed in one set of syllables or another makes no difference; and if a letter is added or subtracted, that does not matter either, so long as the essence of the thing named remains in force and is made plain in the name.
Hermogenes
What do you mean?
Socrates
Something quite simple.
For instance, when we speak of the letters of the alphabet, you know, we speak their names, not merely the letters themselves, except in the case of four, , , , .
We make names for all the other vowels and consonants by adding other letters to them; and so long as we include the letter in question and make its force plain, we may properly call it by that name, and that will designate it for us.
Take beta, for instance, The addition of e(), t(), a() does no harm and does not prevent the whole name from making clear the nature of that letter which the lawgiver wished to designate; he knew so well how to give names to letters.
Hermogenes
I think you are right.
Socrates
Does not the same reasoning apply to a king?
A king's son will probably be a king, a good man's good, a handsome man's handsome, and so forth; the offspring of each class will be of the same class, unless some unnatural birth takes place; so they should be called by the same names.
But variety in the syllables is admissible, so that names which are the same appear different to the uninitiated, just as the physicians' drugs, when prepared with various colors and perfumes, seem different to us, though they are the same, but to the physician, who considers only their medicinal value, they seem the same, and he is not confused by the additions.
So perhaps the man who knows about names considers their value and is not confused if some letter is added, transposed, or subtracted, or even if the force of the name is expressed in entirely different letters.
So, for instance, in the names we were just discussing, Astyanax and Hector, none of the letters is the same, except T, but nevertheless they have the same meaning.
And what letters has Archepolis (ruler of the city) in common with them?
Yet it means the same thing; and there are many other names which mean simply "king."
Others again mean "general," such as Agis (leader), Polemarchus (war-lord), and Eupolemus (good warrior); and others indicate physicians, as Iatrocles (famous physician) and Acesimbrotus (healer of mortals); and we might perhaps find many others which differ in syllables and letters, but express the same meaning.
Do you think that is true, or not?
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
To those, then, who are born in accordance with nature the same names should be given.
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
And how about those who are born contrary to nature as prodigies?
For instance, when an impious son is born to a good and pious man, ought he not, as in our former example when a mare brought forth a calf, to have the designation of the class to which he belongs, instead of that of his parent?
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
Then the impious son of a pious father ought to receive the name of his class.
Hermogenes
True.
Socrates
Not Theophilus (beloved of God) or Mnesitheus (mindful of God) or anything of that sort; but something of opposite meaning, if names are correct.
Hermogenes
Most assuredly, Socrates.
Socrates
As the name of Orestes (mountain man) is undoubtedly correct, Hermogenes, whether it was given him by chance or by some poet who indicated by the name the fierceness, rudeness, and mountain-wildness of his nature.
Hermogenes
So it seems, Socrates.
Socrates
And his father's name also appears to be in accordance with nature.
Hermogenes
It seems so.
Socrates
Yes, for Agamemnon (admirable for remaining) is one who would resolve to toil to the end and to endure, putting the finish upon his resolution by virtue.
And a proof of this is his long retention of the host at Troy and his endurance.
So the name Agamemnon denotes that this man is admirable for remaining.
And so, too, the name of Atreus is likely to be correct; for his murder of Chrysippus and the cruelty of his acts to Thyestes are all damaging and ruinous () to his virtue.
Now the form of his name is slightly deflected and hidden, so that it does not make the man's nature plain to every one; but to those who understand about names it makes the meaning of Atreus plain enough; for indeed in view of his stubbornness () and fearlessness () and ruinous acts () the name is correctly given to him on every ground.
And I think Pelops also has a fitting name; for this name means that he who sees only what is near deserves this designation.
Hermogenes
How is that?
Socrates
Why it is said of him that in murdering Myrtilus he was quite unable to forecast or foresee the ultimate effects upon his whole race, and all the misery with which it was overwhelmed, because he saw only the near at hand and the immediate that is to say,  (near) in his eagerness to win by all means the hand of Hippodameia.
And any one would think the name of Tantalus was given rightly and in accordance with nature, if the stories about him are true.
Hermogenes
What are the stories?
Socrates
The many terrible misfortunes that happened to him both in his life, the last of which was the utter overthrow of his country, and in Hades, after his death, the balancing () of the stone above his head, in wonderful agreement with his name; and it seems exactly as if someone who wished to call him most wretched () disguised the name and said Tantalus instead; in some such way as that chance seems to have affected his name in the legend.
And his father also, who is said to be Zeus, appears to have a very excellent name, but it is not easy to understand;
for the name of Zeus is exactly like a sentence; we divide it into two parts, and some of us use one part, others the other; for some call him Zena, and others Dia; but the two in combination express the nature of the god, which is just what we said a name should be able to do.
For certainly no one is so much the author of life () for us and all others as the ruler and king of all.
Thus this god is correctly named, through whom ( ) all living beings have the gift of life ().
But, as I say, the name is divided, though it is one name, into the two parts, Dia and Zena.
And it might seem, at first hearing, highly irreverent to call him the son of Cronus and reasonable to say that Zeus is the offspring of some great intellect; and so he is, for  (for ) signifies not child, but the purity () and unblemished nature of his mind.
And he, according to tradition, is the son of Uranus; but the upward gaze is rightly called by the name urania (), looking at the things above (  ), and the astronomers say, Hermogenes, that from this looking people acquire a pure mind, and Uranus is correctly named.
If I remembered the genealogy of Hesiod and the still earlier ancestors of the gods he mentions, I would have gone on examining the correctness of their names until I had made a complete trial whether this wisdom which has suddenly come to me, I know not whence, will fail or not.
Hermogenes
Indeed, Socrates, you do seem to me to be uttering oracles, exactly like an inspired prophet.
Socrates
Yes, Hermogenes, and I am convinced that the inspiration came to me from Euthyphro the Prospaltian.
For I was with him and listening to him a long time early this morning.
So he must have been inspired, and he not only filled my ears but took possession of my soul with his superhuman wisdom.
So I think this is our duty: we ought today to make use of this wisdom and finish the investigation of names, but tomorrow, if the rest of you agree, we will conjure it away and purify ourselves, when we have found some one, whether priest or sophist, who is skilled in that kind of purifying.
Hermogenes
I agree, for I should be very glad to hear the rest of the talk about names.
Socrates
Very well.
Then since we have outlined a general plan of investigation, where shall we begin, that we may discover whether the names themselves will bear witness that they are not at all distributed at haphazard, but have a certain correctness?
Now the names of heroes and men might perhaps prove deceptive; for they are often given because they were names of ancestors, and in some cases, as we said in the beginning, they are quite inappropriate; many, too, are given as the expression of a prayer, such as Eutychides, Sosias, Theophilus, and many others.
I think we had better disregard such as these; but we are most likely to find the correct names in the nature of the eternal and absolute;
for there the names ought to have been given with the greatest care, and perhaps some of them were given by a power more divine than is that of men.
Hermogenes
I think you are right, Socrates.
Socrates
Then is it not proper to begin with the gods and see how the gods are rightly called by that name?
Hermogenes
That is reasonable.
Socrates
Something of this sort, then, is what I suspect: I think the earliest men in Greece believed only in those gods in whom many foreigners believe today sun, moon, earth, stars, and sky.
They saw that all these were always moving in their courses and running, and so they called them gods () from this running () nature; then afterwards, when they gained knowledge of the other gods, they called them all by the same name.
Is that likely to be true, or not?
Hermogenes
Yes, very likely.
Socrates
What shall we consider next?
Hermogenes
Spirits, obviously.
Socrates
Hermogenes, what does the name "spirits" really mean?
See if you think there is anything in what I am going to say.
Hermogenes
Go on and say it.
Socrates
Do you remember who Hesiod says the spirits are?
Hermogenes
I do not recall it.
Socrates
Nor that he says a golden race was the first race of men to be born?
Hermogenes
Yes, I do know that.
Socrates
Well, he says of it:"But since Fate has covered up this race,
"They are called holy spirits under the earth,
Noble, averters of evil, guardians of mortal men."
Hermogenes
What of that?
Socrates
Why, I think he means that the golden race was not made of gold, but was good and beautiful.
And I regard it as a proof of this that he further says we are the iron race.
Hermogenes
True.
Socrates
Don't you suppose that if anyone of our day is good, Hesiod would say he was of that golden race?
Hermogenes
Quite likely.
Socrates
But the good are the wise, are they not?
Hermogenes
Yes, they are the wise.
Socrates
This, then, I think, is what he certainly means to say of the spirits: because they were wise and knowing () he called them spirits () and in the old form of our language the two words are the same.
Now he and all the other poets are right, who say that when a good man dies he has a great portion and honor among the dead, and becomes a spirit, a name which is in accordance with the other name of wisdom.
And so I assert that every good man, whether living or dead, is of spiritual nature, and is rightly called a spirit.
Hermogenes
And I, Socrates, believe I quite agree with you in that.
But what is the word "hero"?
Socrates
That is easy to understand;
for the name has been but slightly changed, and indicates their origin from love ().
Hermogenes
What do you mean?
Socrates
Why, they were all born because a god fell in love with a mortal woman, or a mortal man with a goddess.
Now if you consider the word "hero" also in the old Attic pronunciation, you will understand better; for that will show you that it has been only slightly altered from the name of love (Eros), the source from which the heroes spring, to make a name for them.
And either this is the reason why they are called heroes, or it is because they were wise and clever orators and dialecticians, able to ask questions (), for  is the same as  (speak).
Therefore, when their name is spoken in the Attic dialect, which I was mentioning just now, the heroes turn out to be orators and askers of questions, so that the heroic race proves to be a race of orators and sophists.
That is easy to understand, but the case of men, and the reason why they are called men (), is more difficult.
Can you tell me what it is?
Hermogenes
No, my friend, I cannot;
and even if I might perhaps find out, I shall not try, because I think you are more likely to find out than I am.
Socrates
You have faith in the inspiration of Euthyphro, it seems.
Hermogenes
Evidently.
Socrates
And you are right in having it; for just at this very moment I think I have had a clever thought, and if I am not careful, before the day is over I am likely to be wiser than I ought to be.
So pay attention.
First we must remember in regard to names that we often put in or take out letters, making the names different from the meaning we intend, and we change the accent.
Take, for instance,  ; to change this from a phrase to a name, we took out the second iota and pronounced the middle syllable with the grave instead of the acute accent (Diphilus).
In other instances, on the contrary, we insert letters and pronounce grave accents as acute.
Hermogenes
True.
Socrates
Now it appears to me that the name of men () underwent a change of that sort.
It was a phrase, but became a noun when one letter, alpha, was removed and the accent of the last syllable was dropped.
Hermogenes
What do you mean?
Socrates
I will tell you.
The name "man" () indicates that the other animals do not examine, or consider, or look up at () any of the things that they see, but man has no sooner seen that is,  than he looks up at and considers that which he has seen.
Therefore of all the animals man alone is rightly called man (), because he looks up at () what he has seen ().
Hermogenes
Of course.
May I ask you about the next word I should like to have explained?
Socrates
Certainly.
Hermogenes
It seems to me to come naturally next after those you have discussed.
We speak of man's soul and body.
Socrates
Yes, of course.
Hermogenes
Let us try to analyze these, as we did the previous words.
Socrates
You mean consider "soul" () and see why it is properly called by that name, and likewise "body" ()?
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
To speak on the spur of the moment, I think those who gave the soul its name had something of this sort in mind: they thought when it was present in the body it was the cause of its living, giving it the power to breathe and reviving it (), and when this revivifying force fails, the body perishes and comes to an end therefore, I think, they called it .
But please keep still a moment.
I fancy I see something which will carry more conviction to Euthyphro and his followers; for I think they would despise this attempt and would consider it cheap talk.
Now see if you like the new one.
Hermogenes
I am listening.
Socrates
Do you think there is anything which holds and carries the whole nature of the body, so that it lives and moves, except the soul?
Hermogenes
No; nothing.
Socrates
Well, and do you not believe the doctrine of Anaxagoras, that it is mind or soul which orders and holds the nature of all things?
Hermogenes
I do.
Socrates
Then there would be an admirable fitness in calling that power which carries and holds nature 
and this may be refined and pronounced .
Hermogenes
Certainly; and I think this is a more scientific explanation than the other.
Socrates
Yes, it is.
But it seems actually absurd that the name was given with such truth.
Hermogenes
Now what shall we say about the next word?
Socrates
You mean "body" ()?
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
I think this admits of many explanations, if a little, even very little, change is made;
for some say it is the tomb () of the soul, their notion being that the soul is buried in the present life; and again, because by its means the soul gives any signs which it gives, it is for this reason also properly called "sign" ().
But I think it most likely that the Orphic poets gave this name, with the idea that the soul is undergoing punishment for something; they think it has the body as an enclosure to keep it safe, like a prison, and this is, as the name itself denotes, the safe () for the soul, until the penalty is paid, and not even a letter needs to be changed.
Hermogenes
I think, Socrates, enough has been said about these words; but might we not consider the names of the gods in the same way in which you were speaking about that of Zeus a few minutes ago, and see what kind of correctness there is in them?
Socrates
By Zeus, Hermogenes, we, if we are sensible, must recognize that there is one most excellent kind, since of the gods we know nothing, neither of them nor of their names, whatever they may be, by which they call themselves, for it is clear that they use the true names.
But there is a second kind of correctness, that we call them, as is customary in prayers, by whatever names and patronymics are pleasing to them, since we know no other.
Now I think that is an excellent custom.
So, if you like, let us first make a kind of announcement to the gods, saying that we are not going to investigate about them for we do not claim to be able to do that but about men, and let us inquire what thought men had in giving them their names; for in that there is no impiety.
Hermogenes
I think, Socrates, you are right; let us do as you say.
Socrates
Shall we, then, begin with Hestia, according to custom?
Hermogenes
That is the proper thing.
Socrates
Then what would you say the man had in mind who gave Hestia her name?
Hermogenes
By Zeus, I think that is no more easy question than the other.
Socrates
At any rate, my dear Hermogenes, the first men who gave names were no ordinary persons, but high thinkers and great talkers.
Hermogenes
What then?
Socrates
I am sure the names were given by men of that kind; and if foreign names are examined, the meaning of each of them is equally evident.
Take, for instance, that which we call  (reality, essence); some people call it , and still others .
First, then, in connection with the second of these forms, it is reasonable that the essence of things be called Hestia; and moreover, because we ourselves say of that which partakes of reality "it is" (), the name Hestia would be correct in this connection also; for apparently we also called  (reality)  in ancient times.
And besides, if you consider it in connection with sacrifices, you would come to the conclusion that those who established them understood the name in that way; for those who called the essence of things  would naturally sacrifice to Hestia first of all the gods.
Those on the other hand, who say  would agree, well enough with Heracleitus that all things move and nothing remains still.
So they would say the cause and ruler of things was the pushing power (), wherefore it had been rightly named .
But enough of this, considering that we know nothing.
After Hestia it is right to consider Rhea and Cronus.
The name of Cronus, however, has already been discussed.
But perhaps I am talking nonsense.
Hermogenes
Why, Socrates?
Socrates
My friend, I have thought of a swarm of wisdom.
Hermogenes
What is it?
Socrates
It sounds absurd, but I think there is some probability in it.
Hermogenes
What is this probability?
Socrates
I seem to have a vision of Heracleitus saying some ancient words of wisdom as old as the reign of Cronus and Rhea, which Homer said too.
Hermogenes
What do you mean by that?
Socrates
Heracleitus says, you know, that all things move and nothing remains still, and he likens the universe to the current of a river, saying that you cannot step twice into the same stream.
Hermogenes
True.
Socrates
Well, don't you think he who gave to the ancestors of the other gods the names "Rhea" and "Cronus" had the same thought as Heracleitus?
Do you think he gave both of them the names of streams merely by chance?
Just so Homer, too, says "Ocean the origin of the gods, and their mother Tethys;" and I believe Hesiod says that also.
Orpheus, too, says "Fair-flowing Ocean was the first to marry,"
"and he wedded his sister Tethys, daughter of his mother."
See how they agree with each other and all tend towards the doctrine of Heracleitus.
Hermogenes
I think there is something in what you say, Socrates; but I do not know what the name of Tethys means.
Socrates
Why, the name itself almost tells that it is the name of a spring somewhat disguised;
for that which is strained and filtered represents a spring, and the name Tethys is compounded of those two words.
Hermogenes
That is very neat, Socrates.
Socrates
Of course it is.
But what comes next?
Zeus we discussed before.
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
Let us, then, speak of his brothers, Poseidon and Pluto, including also the other name of the latter.
Hermogenes
By all means.
Socrates
I think Poseidon's name was given by him who first applied it, because the power the sea restrained him as he was walking and hindered his advance; it acted as a bond () of his feet ().
So he called the lord of this power Poseidon, regarding him as a foot-bond (-).
The e is inserted perhaps for euphony.
But possibly that may not be right; possibly two lambdas were originally pronounced instead of the sigma, because the god knew () many () things.
Or it may be that from his shaking he was called the Shaker ( ), and the pi and delta are additions.
As for Pluto, he was so named as the giver of wealth (), because wealth comes up from below out of the earth.
And Hades I fancy most people think that this is a name of the Invisible (), so they are afraid and call him Pluto.
Hermogenes
And what do you think yourself, Socrates?
Socrates
I think people have many false notions about the power of this god, and are unduly afraid of him.
They are afraid because when we are once dead we remain in his realm for ever, and they are also terrified because the soul goes to him without the covering of the body.
But I think all these facts, and the office and the name of the god, point in the same direction.
Hermogenes
How so?
Socrates
I will tell you my own view.
Please answer this question: Which is the stronger bond upon any living being to keep him in any one place, desire, or compulsion?
Hermogenes
Desire, Socrates, is much stronger.
Socrates
Then do you not believe there would be many fugitives from Hades, if he did not bind with the strongest bond those who go to him there?
Hermogenes
Of course there would.
Socrates
Apparently, then, if he binds them with the strongest bond, he binds them by some kind of desire, not by compulsion.
Hermogenes
Yes, that is plain.
Socrates
There are many desires, are there not?
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
Then he binds with the desire which is the strongest of all, if he is to restrain them with the strongest bond.
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
And is there any desire stronger than the thought of being made a better man by association with some one?
Hermogenes
No, by Zeus, Socrates, there certainly is not.
Socrates
Then, Hermogenes, we must believe that this is the reason why no one has been willing to come away from that other world, not even the Sirens, but they and all others have been overcome by his enchantments, so beautiful, as it appears, are the words which Hades has the power to speak; and from this point of view this god is a perfect sophist and a great benefactor of those in his realm, he who also bestows such great blessings upon us who are on earth;
such abundance surrounds him there below, and for this reason he is called Pluto.
Then, too, he refuses to consort with men while they have bodies, but only accepts their society when the soul is pure of all the evils and desires of the body.
Do you not think this shows him to be a philosopher and to understand perfectly that under these conditions he could restrain them by binding them with the desire of virtue, but that so long as they are infected with the unrest and madness of the body, not even his father Cronus could hold them to himself, though he bound them with his famous chains?
Hermogenes
There seems to be something in that, Socrates.
Socrates
And the name "Hades" is not in the least derived from the invisible (), but far more probably from knowing () all noble things, and for that reason he was called Hades by the lawgiver.
Hermogenes
Very well; what shall we say of Demeter, Hera, Apollo, Athena, Hephaestus, Ares, and the other gods
Socrates
Demeter appears to have been called Demeter, because like a mother she gives the gift of food, and Hera is a lovely one, as indeed, Zeus is said to have married her for love.
But perhaps the lawgiver had natural phenomena in mind, and called her Hera as a disguise for air, putting the beginning at the end.
You would understand, if you were to repeat the name Hera over and over.
And Pherephatta! How many people fear this name, and also Apollo!
I imagine it is because they do not know about correctness of names.
You see they change the name to Phersephone and its aspect frightens them.
But really the name indicates that the goddess is wise;
for since things are in motion, that which grasps and touches and is able to follow them is wisdom.
Pherepapha, or something of that sort, would therefore be the correct name of the goddess, because she is wise and touches that which is in motion and this is the reason why Hades, who is wise, consorts with her, because she is wise but people have altered her name, attaching more importance to euphony than to truth, and they call her Pherephatta.
Likewise in the case of Apollo, as I say, many people are afraid because of the name of the god, thinking that it has some terrible meaning.
Have you not noticed that?
Hermogenes
Certainly; what you say is true.
Socrates
But really the name is admirably appropriate to the power of the god.
Hermogenes
How is that?
Socrates
I will try to tell you what I think about it; for no single name could more aptly indicate the four functions of the god, touching upon them all and in a manner declaring his power in music, prophecy, medicine, and archery.
Hermogenes
Go on; you seem to imply that it is a remarkable name.
Socrates
His name and nature are in harmony; you see he is a musical god.
For in the first place, purification and purgations used in medicine and in soothsaying, and fumigations with medicinal and magic drugs, and the baths and sprinklings connected with that sort of thing all have the single function of making a man pure in body and soul, do they not?
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
But this is the god who purifies and washes away () and delivers () from such evils, is he not?
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
With reference, then, to his acts of delivering and his washings, as being the physician of such diseases, he might properly be called Apoluon, and with reference to soothsaying and truth and simplicity for the two are identical he might most properly be called by the name the Thessalians use; for all Thessalians call the god Aplun.
And because he is always by his archery controller of darts he is ever darting.
And with reference to music we have to understand that alpha often signifies "together," and here it denotes moving together in the heavens about the poles, as we call them, and harmony in song, which is called concord; for, as the ingenious musicians and astronomers tell us, all these things move together by a kind of harmony.
And this god directs the harmony, making them all move together, among both gods and men; and so, just as we call the him who accompanies, and bedfellow, by changing the  to alpha,  and , so also we called him Apollo who was Homopolo, and the second lambda was inserted, because without it the name sounded of disaster.
Even as it is, some have a suspicion of this, because they do not properly regard the force of the name, and therefore they fear it, thinking that it denotes some kind of ruin.
But in fact, as was said, the name touches upon all the qualities of the god, as simple, ever-darting, purifying, and accompanying.
The Muses and music in general are named, apparently, from , searching, and philosophy;
and Leto from her gentleness, because whatever is asked of her, she is willing.
But perhaps her name is Letho, as she is called by many foreigners; and those who call her by that name seem to do so on account of the mild and gentle kindness of her character.
Artemis appears to get her name from her healthy and well-ordered nature, and her love of virginity; or perhaps he who named her meant that she is learned in virtue, or possibly, too, that she hates sexual intercourse of man and woman; or he who gave the goddess her name may have given it for any or all of these reasons.
Hermogenes
What of Dionysus and Aphrodite?
Socrates
You ask great things of me, son of Hipponicus.
You see there is both a serious and a facetious account of the form of the name of these deities.
You will have to ask others for the serious one; but there is nothing to hinder my giving you the facetious account, for the gods also have a sense of humor.
Dionysus, the giver () of wine (), might be called in jest Didoinysus, and wine, because it makes most drinkers think () they have wit () when they have not, might very justly be called Oeonus ().
As for Aphrodite, we need not oppose Hesiod; we can accept his derivation of the name from her birth out of the foam ().
Hermogenes
But surely you, as an Athenian, will not forget Athena, nor Hephaestus and Ares.
Socrates
That is not likely.
Hermogenes
No.
Socrates
It is easy to tell the reason of one of her two names.
Hermogenes
What name?
Socrates
We call her Pallas, you know.
Hermogenes
Yes, of course.
Socrates
Those of us are right, I fancy, who think this name is derived from armed dances, for lifting oneself or anything else from the ground or in the hands is called shaking () and being shaken, or dancing and being danced.
Hermogenes
Yes, certainly.
Socrates
So that is the reason she is called Pallas.
Hermogenes
And rightly called so.
But what can you say of her other name?
Socrates
You mean Athena?
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
That is a weightier matter, my friend.
The ancients seem to have had the same belief about Athena as the interpreters of Homer have now;
for most of these, in commenting on the poet, say that he represents Athena as mind and intellect; and the maker of her name seems to have had a similar conception of her, but he gives her the still grander title of "mind of God"   , seeming to say that she is a  ; here he used the alpha in foreign fashion instead of eta, and dropped out the iota and sigma.
But perhaps that was not his reason; he may have called her Theonoe because she has unequalled knowledge of divine things.
Perhaps, too, he may have wished to identify the goddess with wisdom of character by calling her Ethonoe; and then he himself or others afterwards improved the name, as they thought, and called her Athenaa.
Hermogenes
And how do you explain Hephaestus?
Socrates
You ask about "the noble master of light"?
Hermogenes
To be sure.
Socrates
He is Phaestus, with the eta added by attraction; anyone could see that, I should think.
Hermogenes
Very likely, unless some other explanation occurs to you, as it probably will.
Socrates
To prevent that, ask about Ares.
Hermogenes
I do ask.
Socrates
Ares, then, if you like, would be named for his virility and courage, or for his hard and unbending nature, which is called ; so Ares would be in every way a fitting name for the god of war.
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
For God's sake, let us leave the gods, as I am afraid to talk about them; but ask me about any others you please, "that you may see what" Euthyphro's "horses are."
Hermogenes
I will do these things.
I want to ask you about Hermes, since Cratylus says I am not Hermogenes.
Let us investigate the name of Hermes, to find out whether there is anything in what he says.
Socrates
Well then, this name "Hermes" seems to me to have to do with speech; he is an interpreter and a messenger, is wily and deceptive in speech, and is oratorical.
All this activity is concerned with the power of speech.
Now, as I said before,  denotes the use of speech; moreover, Homer often uses the word , which means "contrive."
From these two words, then, the lawgiver imposes upon us the name of this god who contrived speech and the use of speech  means "speak" and tells us: "Ye human beings, he who contrived speech ought to be called Eiremes by you."
We, however, have beautified the name, as we imagine, and call him Hermes.
Iris also seems to have got her name from , because she is a messenger.
Hermogenes
By Zeus, I believe Cratylus was right in saying I was not Hermogenes; I certainly am no good contriver of speech.
Socrates
And it is reasonable, my friend, that Pan is the double-natured son of Hermes.
Hermogenes
How is that?
Socrates
You know that speech makes all things () known and always makes them circulate and move about, and is twofold, true and false.
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
Well, the true part is smooth and divine and dwells aloft among the gods, but falsehood dwells below among common men, is rough and like the tragic goat; for tales and falsehoods are most at home there, in the tragic life.
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
Then Pan, who declares and always moves ( ) all, is rightly called goat-herd (), being the double-natured son of Hermes, smooth in his upper parts, rough and goat-like in his lower parts.
And Pan, if he is the son of Hermes, is either speech or the brother of speech, and that brother resembles brother is not at all surprising.
But, as I said, my friend, let us get away from the gods.
Hermogenes
From such gods as those, if you like, Socrates;
but why should you not tell of another kind of gods, such as sun, moon, stars, earth, ether, air, fire, water, the seasons, and the year?
Socrates
You are imposing a good many tasks upon me; however, if it will give you pleasure, I am willing.
Hermogenes
It will give me pleasure.
Socrates
What, then, do you wish first?
Shall we discuss the sun (), as you mentioned it first?
Hermogenes
By all means.
Socrates
I think it would be clearer if we were to use the Doric form of the name.
The Dorians call it .
Now  might be derived from collecting () men when he rises, or because he always turns ( ) about the earth in his course, or because he variegates the products of the earth, for variegate is identical with .
Hermogenes
And what of the moon, Selene?
Socrates
That name appears to put Anaxagoras in an uncomfortable position.
Hermogenes
How so?
Socrates
Why, it seems to have anticipated by many years the recent doctrine of Anaxagoras, that the moon receives its light from the sun.
Hermogenes
How is that?
Socrates
Gleam and light are the same thing.
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
Now the light is always new and old about the moon, if the Anaxagoreans are right; for they say the sun, in its continuous course about the moon, always sheds new light upon it, and the light of the previous month persists.
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
The moon is often called .
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
Because it has always a new and old gleam the very most fitting name for it would be , which has been compressed into .
Hermogenes
That is a regular opera bouffe name, Socrates.
But what have you to say of the month () and the stars?
Socrates
The word "month" () would be properly pronounced , from , "to grow less," and I think the stars () get their name from  (lightning).
But , because it turns our eyes upwards (  ), would be called , which is now pronounced more prettily .
Hermogenes
And what of  (fire) and  (water)?
Socrates
 is too much for me.
It must be that either the muse of Euthyphro has deserted me or this is a very difficult word.
Now just note the contrivance I introduce in all cases like this which are too much for me.
Hermogenes
What contrivance?
Socrates
I will tell you.
Answer me; can you tell the reason of the word ?
Hermogenes
Not I, by Zeus.
Socrates
See what I suspect about it.
I know that many Greeks, especially those who are subject to the barbarians, have adopted many foreign words.
Hermogenes
What of that?
Socrates
If we should try to demonstrate the fitness of those words in accordance with the Greek language, and not in accordance with the language from which they are derived, you know we should get into trouble.
Hermogenes
Naturally.
Socrates
Well, this word  is probably foreign; for it is difficult to connect it with the Greek language, and besides, the Phrygians have the same word, only slightly altered.
The same is the case with  (water),  (dog), and many other words.
Hermogenes
Yes, that is true.
Socrates
So we must not propose forced explanations of these words, though something might be said about them.
I therefore set aside  and  in this way.
But is air called  because it raises () things from the earth, or because it is always flowing ( ), or because wind arises from its flow?
The poets call the winds , "blasts."
Perhaps the poet means to say "air-flow" (), as he might say "wind-flow" ().
The word  (ether) I understand in this way: because it always runs and flows about the air (     ), it may properly be called .
The word  (earth) shows the meaning better in the form ; for  is a correct word for "mother," as Homer says, for he uses  to mean  (be born).
Well, now what came next?
Hermogenes
The seasons, Socrates, and the two words for year.
Socrates
The word  (seasons) should be pronounced in the old Attic fashion, , if you wish to know the probable meaning;  exist to divide winters and summers and winds and the fruits of the earth; and since they divide, they would rightly be called .
The two words for year,  and , are really one.
For that which brings to light within itself the plants and animals, each in its turn, and examines them, is called by some , because of its activity within itself, and by others , because it examines, just as we saw before that the name of Zeus was divided and some said  and others .
The whole phrase is "that which examines within itself", and this one phrase is divided in speech so that the two words  and  are formed from one phrase.
Hermogenes
Truly, Socrates, you are going ahead at a great rate.
Socrates
Yes, I fancy I am already far along on the road of wisdom.
Hermogenes
I am sure you are.
Socrates
You will be surer presently.
Hermogenes
Now after the class of words you, have explained, I should like to examine the correctness of the noble words that relate to virtue, such as wisdom, intelligence, justice, and all the others of that sort.
Socrates
You are stirring up a mighty tribe of words, my friend; however, since I have put on the lion helmet, I must not play the coward, but must, it seems, examine wisdom, intelligence, thought, knowledge, and all the other noble words of which you speak.
Hermogenes
Certainly we must not stop until that is done.
Socrates
By dog, I believe I have a fine intuition which has just come to me, that the very ancient men who invented names were quite like most of the present philosophers who always get dizzy as they turn round and round in their search for the nature of things, and then the things seem to them to turn round and round and be in motion.
They think the cause of this belief is not an affection within themselves, but that the nature of things really is such that nothing is at rest or stable, but everything is flowing and moving and always full of constant motion and generation.
I say this because I thought of it with reference to all these words we are now considering.
Hermogenes
How is that, Socrates?
Socrates
Perhaps you did not observe that the names we just mentioned are given under the assumption that the things named are moving and flowing and being generated.
Hermogenes
No, I did not notice that at all.
Socrates
Surely the first one we mentioned is subject to such assumptions.
Hermogenes
What is the word ?
Socrates
Wisdom ; for it is perception of motion and flowing;
or it might be understood as benefit of motion; in either case it has to do with motion.
And thought, if you please, certainly denotes contemplation and consideration of generation; for to consider is the same as to contemplate.
Or, if you please, intelligence is merely desire of the new; but that things are new shows that they are always being generated; therefore the soul's desire for generation is declared by the giver of the name ; for in antiquity the name was not , but two epsilons had to be spoken instead of the eta.
Self-restraint is salvation of wisdom, which we have just been discussing.
And knowledge indicates that the soul which is of any account accompanies things in their motion, neither falling behind them nor running in front of them; therefore we ought to insert an epsilon and call it .
Intelligence in its turn is a kind of reckoning together; when one says understand, the same thing as  is said; for  means that the soul goes with things.
Certainly wisdom denotes the touching of motion.
This word is very obscure and of foreign origin; but we must remember that the poets often say of something which begins to advance it rushed.
There was a famous Laconian whose name was Rush, for this is the Laconian word for rapid motion.
Now  signifies the touching of this rapid motion, the assumption being that things are in motion.
And the word good is intended to denote the admirable in all nature.
For since all things are in motion, they possess quickness and slowness;
now not all that is swift, but only part of it, is admirable;
this name  is therefore given to the admirable part of the swift.
It is easy to conjecture that the word  applies to the understanding of the just but the word just is itself difficult.
Up to a certain point, you see, many men seem to agree about it, but beyond that they differ.
For those who think the universe is in motion believe that the greater part of it is of such a nature as to be a mere receptacle, and that there is some element which passes through all this, by means of which all created things are generated.
And this element must be very rapid and very subtle; for it could not pass through all the universe unless it were very subtle, so that nothing could keep it out, and it must be very swift, so that all other things are relatively at rest.
Since, then, it superintends and passes through all other things, this is rightly called by the name , the sound of the kappa being added merely for the sake of euphony.
Up to this point, as I said just now, many men agree about justice; and I, Hermogenes, being very much in earnest about it, have persistently asked questions and have been told in secret teachings that this is justice, or the cause for that through which creation takes place is a cause and some one told me that it was for this reason rightly called Zeus.
But when, after hearing this, I nevertheless ask them quietly, "What then, my most excellent friend, if this is true, is justice?"
they think I am asking too many questions and am leaping over the trenches.
They say I have been told enough; they try to satisfy me by saying all sorts of different things, and they no longer agree.
For one says the sun is justice, for the sun alone superintends all things, passing through and burning them.
Then when I am pleased and tell this to some one, thinking it is a fine answer, he laughs at me and asks if I think there is no justice among men when the sun has set.
So I beg him to tell me what he thinks it is, and he says "Fire."
But this is not easy to understand.
He says it is not actual fire, but heat in the abstract that is in the fire.
Another man says he laughs at all these notions, and that justice is what Anaxagoras says it is, mind; for mind, he says, is ruled only by itself, is mixed with nothing, orders all things, and passes through them.
Then, my friend, I am far more perplexed than before I undertook to learn about the nature of justice.
But I think the name and that was the subject of our investigation was given for the reasons I have mentioned.
Hermogenes
I think, Socrates, you must have heard this from some one and are not inventing it yourself.
Socrates
And how about the rest of my talk?
Hermogenes
I do not at all think you had heard that.
Socrates
Listen then; perhaps I may deceive you into thinking that all I am going to say is my own.
What remains to consider after justice?
I think we have not yet discussed courage.
It is plain enough that injustice is really a mere hindrance of that which passes through, but the word courage implies that courage got its name in battle, and if the universe is flowing, a battle in the universe can be nothing else than an opposite current or flow.
Now if we remove the delta from the word , the word  signifies exactly that activity.
Of course it is clear that not the current opposed to every current is courage, but only that opposed to the current which is contrary to justice; for otherwise courage would not be praised.
The words male and man refer, like , to the upward current or flow.
The word woman seems to me to be much the same as birth.
I think female is derived from teat; and is not teat, Hermogenes, so called because it makes things flourish, like plants wet with showers?
Hermogenes
Very likely, Socrates.
Socrates
And again, the word flourish seems to me to figure the rapid and sudden growth of the young.
Something of that sort the namegiver has reproduced in the name, which he compounded of run and jump.
You do not seem to notice how I rush along outside of the race-course, when I get on smooth ground.
But we still have plenty of subjects left which seem to be serious.
Hermogenes
True.
Socrates
One of which is to see what the word art means.
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
Does not this denote possession of mind, if you remove the tau and insert omicron between the chi and the nu and the nu and the eta (making )?
Hermogenes
It does it very poorly, Socrates.
Socrates
My friend, you do not bear in mind that the original words have before now been completely buried by those who wished to dress them up, for they have added and subtracted letters for the sake of euphony and have distorted the words in every way for ornamentation or merely in the lapse of time.
Do you not, for instance, think it absurd that the letter rho is inserted in the word mirror?
I think that sort of thing is the work of people who care nothing for truth, but only for the shape of their mouths; so they keep adding to the original words until finally no human being can understand what in the world the word means.
So the sphinx, for instance, is called sphinx, instead of phix, and there are many other examples.
Hermogenes
Yes, that is true, Socrates.
Socrates
And if we are permitted to insert and remove any letters we please in words, it will be perfectly easy to fit any name to anything.
Hermogenes
True.
Socrates
Yes, quite true.
But I think you, as a wise director, must observe the rule of moderation and probability.
Hermogenes
I should like to do so.
Socrates
And I, too, Hermogenes.
But do not, my friend, demand too much precision, lest you "enfeeble me of my sight."
For now that art is disposed of, I am nearing the loftiest height of my subject, when once we have investigated (contrivance).
For I think  signifies much accomplishment; for length has about the same meaning as much, and the name  is composed of these two,  and .
But, as I was just saying, we must go on to the loftiest height of our subject; we must search for the meaning of the words virtue and wickedness.
Now one of them I cannot yet see; but the other seems to be quite clear,
since it agrees with everything we have said before.
For inasmuch as all things are in motion, everything that moves badly would be evil; and when this evil motion in relation to its environment exists in the soul, it receives the general name evil in the special sense of wickedness.
But the nature of evil motion is made clear, I think, also in the word cowardice, which we have not yet discussed.
We passed it by, when we ought to have examined it after courage; and I fancy we passed over a good many other words.
Now the meaning of  is "a strong bond of the soul"; for excessively is, in a way, expressive of strength;
so  would be the excessive or greatest bond of the soul; and so, too, perplexity is an evil, as is everything, apparently, which hinders motion and progress.
This, then, seems to be the meaning of evil motion, that advance is halting and impeded; and the soul that is infected by it becomes filled with wickedness.
If these are the reasons for the name of wickedness, virtue would be the opposite of this; it would signify first ease of motion, and secondly that the flow of the good soul is always unimpeded, and therefore it has received this name, which designates that which always flows without let or hindrance.
It is properly called , or perhaps also , indicating that this condition is especially to be chosen; but it has been compressed and is pronounced .
Perhaps you will say this is another invention of mine; but I say if what I said just now about  is right, this about the name of  is right too.
Hermogenes
But what is the meaning of the word  which you used in many of your derivations?
Socrates
By Zeus, I think it is a strange word and hard to understand;
so I apply to it that contrivance of mine.
Hermogenes
What contrivance?
Socrates
The claim of foreign origin, which I advance in this case as in those others.
Hermogenes
Well, probably you are right.
But, if you please, let us drop these words and try to discover the reasons for the words  (beautiful, noble) and  (base).
Socrates
I think the meaning of  is clear, and this also agrees with what has been said before.
For the giver of names appears to me throughout to denounce that which hinders and restrains things from flowing, and in this instance he gave to that which always restrains the flow (   ) this name , which is now compressed and pronounced .
Hermogenes
What about ?
Socrates
That is harder to understand,
and yet it expresses its meaning:
it has been altered merely in accent and in the length of the O.
Hermogenes
How is that?
Socrates
I think this word denotes intellect.
Hermogenes
What do you mean?
Socrates
Why, what do you think is the cause why anything is called by a name?
Is it not the power which gave the name?
Hermogenes
Why, certainly.
Socrates
And is not that power the intellect either of gods or of men or both?
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
Are not that which called things by name and that which calls them by name ( ) the same thing, namely intellect?
Hermogenes
Yes, clearly.
Socrates
And are not all works which are done by mind and intelligence worthy of praise, and those that are not done by them worthy of blame?
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
Does not the medical power perform medical works and the power of carpentry works of carpentry?
Do you agree to that?
Hermogenes
I agree.
Socrates
And the beautiful performs beautiful works?
Hermogenes
It must do so.
Socrates
And the beautiful is, we say, intellect?
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
Then this name, the beautiful, is rightly given to mind, since it accomplishes the works which we call beautiful and in which we delight.
Hermogenes
Evidently.
Socrates
What further words of this sort are left for us?
Hermogenes
Those that are related to the good and the beautiful, such as advantageous, profitable, useful, gainful, and their opposites.
Socrates
You might by this time be able to find the meaning of  by yourself in the light of the previous explanations, for it appears to be own brother to .
It means nothing else but the motion of the soul in company with the world, and naturally things which are done by such a power are called  and  because they are carried round with the world.
But  is from gain.
If you restore nu in the word  in place of the delta, the meaning is plain; it signifies good, but in another way.
Because it passes through and is mingled with all things, he who named it gave it this name which indicates that function; but he inserted a delta instead of nu and said .
Hermogenes
And what is ?
Socrates
I do not think, Hermogenes, the name-giver gives the meaning to  which it has in the language of tradesfolk, when profit sets free the sum invested, but he means that because it is the swiftest thing in the world it does not allow things to remain at rest and does not allow the motion to come to any end of movement or to stop or pause, but always, if any end of the motion is attempted, it sets it free, making it unceasing and immortal.
It is in this sense, I think, that the good is dubbed , for it frees the end of the motion.
But the word  is a foreign one, which Homer often uses in the verbal form .
This is a synonym of "increase" and "create."
Hermogenes
What shall be our explanations of the opposites of these?
Socrates
Those of them that are mere negatives, need, I think, no discussion.
Hermogenes
Which are those?
Socrates
Disadvantageous, useless, unprofitable, and ungainful.
Hermogenes
True.
Socrates
But harmful and hurtful do need it.
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
And  means that which harms the flow ; but  means "wishing to fasten", and  is the same thing as bind, which the name-giver constantly finds fault with.
Now that which wishes to fasten the flow would most correctly be called , but is called  merely, as I think, to make it prettier.
Hermogenes
Elaborate names these are, Socrates, that result from your method.
Just now, when you pronounced , you looked as if you had made up your mouth to whistle the flute-prelude of the hymn to Athena.
Socrates
Not I, Hermogenes, am responsible, but those who gave the name.
Hermogenes
True.
Well, what is the origin of ?
Socrates
What can the origin of  be?
See, Hermogenes, how true my words are when I say that by adding and taking away letters people alter the sense of words so that even by very slight changes they sometimes make them mean the opposite of what they meant before;
as, for instance, in the case of the word right, for that just occurred to me and I was reminded of it by what I was going to say to you, that this fine modern language of ours has turned  and also  round, so that each has the opposite of its original meaning, whereas the ancient language shows clearly the real sense of both words.
Hermogenes
What do you mean?
Socrates
I will tell you.
You know that our ancestors made good use of the sounds of iota and delta, and that is especially true of the women, who are most addicted to preserving old forms of speech.
But nowadays people change iota to eta or epsilon, and delta to zeta, thinking they have a grander sound.
Hermogenes
How is that?
Socrates
For instance, in the earliest times they called day , others said , and now they say .
Hermogenes
That is true.
Socrates
Only the ancient word discloses the intention of the name-giver, don't you know?
For day comes out of darkness to men; they welcome it and long for it, and so they called it .
Hermogenes
That is clear.
Socrates
But now  is masquerading so that you could not guess its meaning.
Why, some people think day is called  because it makes things gentle.
Hermogenes
I believe they do.
Socrates
And you know the ancients called  (yoke) .
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
And  conveys no clear meaning, but the name  is quite properly given to that which binds two together for the purpose of draught; now, however, we say .
There are a great many other such instances.
Hermogenes
Yes, that is plain.
Socrates
Similarly the word obligation at first, when spoken in this way, denotes the opposite of all words connected with the good; for although it is a form of good,  seems to be a bond and hindrance of motion, own brother, as it were, to.
Hermogenes
Yes, Socrates, it certainly does seem so.
Socrates
But it does not, if you employ the ancient word, which is more likely to be right than the present one.
You will find that it agrees with the previous words for "good," if instead of the epsilon you restore the iota, as it was in old times for going through, not , signifies good, which the name-giver praises.
And so the giver of names does not contradict himself, but obligation, useful, profitable, gainful, good, advantageous, and prosperous, are plainly identical, signifying under different names the principle of arrangement and motion which has constantly been praised, whereas the principle of constraint and bondage is found fault with.
And likewise in the case of , if you restore the ancient delta in place of the zeta, you will see that the name, pronounced , was given to that which binds motion.
Hermogenes
What of pleasure and pain and desire, and the like, Socrates?
Socrates
I do not think they are at all difficult, Hermogenes,
for  appears to have this name because it is the action that tends towards advantage; the delta is inserted, so that we say  instead of .
 appears to have received its name from the dissolution of the body which takes place through pain.
Sorrow is that which hinders motion.
Distress is, I think, a foreign word, derived from distressing.
Grief appears to be so called from the putting on of pain.
Vexation has a name, as anyone can see, made in the likeness of the weight which vexation imposes upon motion.
Joy seems to have its name from the plenteous diffusion of the flow of the soul.
Delight is from delightful; and  is called from the creeping of the soul, which is likened to a breath, and would properly be called , but the name has been changed in course of time to .
(mirth) needs no explanation, for it is clear to anyone that from the motion of the soul in harmony with the universe, it received the name , as it rightfully is; but we call it .
Nor is there any difficulty about desire, for this name was evidently given to the power that goes into the soul.
And  has its name from the raging and boiling of the soul.
The name longing was given to the stream which most draws the soul; for because it flows with a rush and with a desire for things and thus draws the soul on through the impulse of its flowing, all this power gives it the name of .
And the word  (yearning) signifies that it pertains not to that which is present, but to that which is elsewhere or absent, and therefore the same feeling which is called  when its object is present, is called  when it is absent.
And  (love) is so called because it flows in from without, and this flowing is not inherent in him who has it, but is introduced through the eyes; for this reason it was in ancient times called , from  for we used to employ omicron instead of omega but now it is called  through the change of omicron to omega.
Well, what more is there that you want to examine?
Hermogenes
What is your view about opinion and the like?
Socrates
 is derived either from the pursuit which the soul carries on as it pursues the knowledge of the nature of things, or from the shooting of the bow;
the latter is more likely;
at any rate belief supports this view,
for it appears to mean the motion of the soul towards the essential nature of every individual thing, just as intention denotes shooting and wish, as well as plan, denotes aiming at something.
All these words seem to follow  and to express the idea of shooting, just as ill-advisedness, on the other hand, appears to be a failure to hit, as if a person did not shoot or hit that which he shot at or wished or planned or desired.
Hermogenes
I think you are hurrying things a bit, Socrates.
Socrates
Yes, for I am running the last lap now.
But I think I must still explain compulsion and voluntary because they naturally come next.
Now by the word  is expressed the yielding and not opposing, but, as I say, yielding to the motion which is in accordance with the will; but the compulsory and resistant, being contrary to the will, is associated with error and ignorance; so it is likened to walking through ravines, because they are hard to traverse, rough, and rugged, and retard motion;
the word  may, then, originate in a comparison with progress through a ravine.
But let us not cease to use my strength, so long as it lasts and do not you cease from asking questions.
Hermogenes
I ask, then, about the greatest and noblest words, truth, falsehood, being, and why name, the subject of our whole discourse, has the name .
Socrates
Does the word search mean anything to you?
Hermogenes
Yes, it means "seek."
Socrates
The word  seems to be a word composed from a sentence signifying "this is a being about which our search is."
You can recognize that more readily in the adjective , for that says clearly that this is being of which the search is.
And truth is like the others; for the divine motion of the universe is, I think, called by this name, , because it is a divine wandering.
But falsehood is the opposite of motion; for once more that which is held back and forced to be quiet is found fault with, and it is compared to slumberers; but the addition of the psi conceals the meaning of the word.
The words being and existence agree with  with the loss of iota, for they mean "going".
And not being means not going, and indeed some people pronounce it so.
Hermogenes
I think you have knocked these words to pieces manfully, Socrates; but if anyone should ask you what propriety or correctness there was in these words that you have employed  and  and 
Socrates
What answer should I make?
Is that your meaning?
Hermogenes
Yes, exactly.
Socrates
We acquired just now one way of making an answer with a semblance of sense in it.
Hermogenes
What way was that?
Socrates
Saying, if there is a word we do not know about, that it is of foreign origin.
Now this may be true of some of them, and also on account of the lapse of time it may be impossible to find out about the earliest words; for since words get twisted in all sorts of ways, it would not be in the least wonderful if the ancient Greek word should be identical with the modern foreign one.
Hermogenes
That is not unlikely.
Socrates
It is indeed quite probable.
However, we must play the game and investigate these questions vigorously.
But let us bear in mind that if a person asks about the words by means of which names are formed, and again about those by means of which those words were formed, and keeps on doing this indefinitely, he who answers his questions will at last give up; will he not?
Hermogenes
Yes, I think so.
Socrates
Now at what point will he be right in giving up and stopping?
Will it not be when he reaches the names which are the elements of the other names and words?
For these, if they are the elements, can no longer rightly appear to be composed of other names.
For instance, we said just now that  was composed of  and ; and perhaps we might say that  was composed of other words, and those of still others; but if we ever get hold of a word which is no longer composed of other words, we should be right ill saying that we had at last reached an element, and that we must no longer refer to other words for its derivation.
Hermogenes
I think you are right.
Socrates
Are, then, these words about which you are now asking elements, and must we henceforth investigate their correctness by some other method?
Hermogenes
Probably.
Socrates
Yes, probably, Hermogenes; at any rate, all the previous words were traced back to these.
But if this be true, as I think it is, come to my aid again and help me in the investigation, that I may not say anything foolish in declaring what principle must underlie the correctness of the earliest names.
Hermogenes
Go on, and I will help you to the best of my ability.
Socrates
I think you agree with me that there is but one principle of correctness in all names, the earliest as well as the latest, and that none of them is any more a name than the rest.
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
Now the correctness of all the names we have discussed was based upon the intention of showing the nature of the things named.
Hermogenes
For how not?
Socrates
And this principle of correctness must be present in all names, the earliest as well as the later ones, if they are really to be names.
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
But the later ones, apparently, were able to accomplish this by means of the earlier ones.
Hermogenes
Evidently.
Socrates
Well, then, how can the earliest names, which are not as yet based upon any others, make clear to us the nature of things, so far as that is possible, which they must do if they are to be names at all?
Answer me this question: If we had no voice or tongue, and wished to make things clear to one another, should we not try, as dumb people actually do, to make signs with our hands and head and person generally?
Hermogenes
What other method is there, Socrates?
Socrates
If we wished to designate that which is above and is light, we should, I fancy, raise our hand towards heaven in imitation of the nature of the thing in question; but if the things to be designated were below or heavy, we should extend our hands towards the ground;
and if we wished to mention a galloping horse or any other animal, we should, of course, make our bodily attitudes as much like theirs as possible.
Hermogenes
I think you are quite right; there is no other way.
Socrates
For the expression of anything, I fancy, would be accomplished by bodily imitation of that which was to be expressed.
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
And when we wish to express anything by voice or tongue or mouth, will not our expression by these means be accomplished in any given instance when an imitation of something is accomplished by them?
Hermogenes
I think that is inevitable.
Socrates
A name, then, it appears, is a vocal imitation of that which is imitated, and he who imitates with his voice names that which he imitates.
Hermogenes
I think that is correct.
Socrates
By Zeus, I do not think it is quite correct, yet, my friend.
Hermogenes
Why not?
Socrates
We should be obliged to agree that people who imitate sheep and cocks and other animals were naming those which they imitate.
Hermogenes
Yes, so we should.
Socrates
And do you think that is correct?
Hermogenes
No, I do not;
but, Socrates, what sort of an imitation is a name?
Socrates
In the first place we shall not, in my opinion, be making names, if we imitate things as we do in music, although musical imitation also is vocal; and secondly we shall make no names by imitating that which music imitates.
What I mean is this: all objects have sound and shape, and many have color, have they not?
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
Well then, the art of naming is not employed in the imitation of those qualities, and has nothing to do with them.
The arts which are concerned with them are music and design, are they not?
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
Here is another point.
Has not each thing an essential nature, just as it has a color and the other qualities we just mentioned?
Indeed, in the first place, have not color and sound and all other things which may properly be said to exist, each and all an essential nature?
Hermogenes
I think so.
Socrates
Well, then, if anyone could imitate this essential nature of each thing by means of letters and syllables, he would show what each thing really is, would he not?
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
And what will you call him who can do this, as you called the others musician and painter?
What will you call this man?
Hermogenes
I think, Socrates, he is what we have been looking for all along, the name-maker.
Socrates
If that is the case, is it our next duty to consider whether in these names about which you were asking flow, motion, and restraint the namemaker grasps with his letters and syllables the reality of the things named and imitates their essential nature, or not?
Hermogenes
Certainly.
Socrates
Well now, let us see whether those are the only primary names, or there are others.
Hermogenes
I think there are others.
Socrates
Yes, most likely there are.
Now what is the method of division with which the imitator begins his imitation?
Since the imitation of the essential nature is made with letters and syllables, would not the most correct way be for us to separate the letters first, just as those who undertake the practice of rhythms separate first the qualities of the letters, then those of the syllables, and then, but not till then, come to the study of rhythms?
Hermogenes
Yes.
Socrates
Must not we, too, separate first the vowels, then in their several classes the consonants or mutes, as they are called by those who specialize in phonetics, and also the letters which are neither vowels nor mutes, as well as the various classes that exist among the vowels themselves?
And when we have made all these divisions properly, we must in turn give names to the things which ought to have them, if there are any names to which they can all, like the letters, be referred, from which it is possible to see what their nature is and whether there are any classes among them, as there are among letters.
When we have properly examined all these points, we must know how to apply each letter with reference to its fitness, whether one letter is to be applied to one thing or many are to be combined;
just as painters, when they wish to produce an imitation, sometimes use only red, sometimes some other color, and sometimes mix many colors, as when they are making a picture of a man or something of that sort, employing each color, I suppose, as they think the particular picture demands it.
In just this way we, too, shall apply letters to things, using one letter for one thing, when that seems to be required, or many letters together, forming syllables, as they are called, and in turn combining syllables, and by their combination forming nouns and verbs.
And from nouns and verbs again we shall finally construct something great and fair and complete.
Just as in our comparison we made the picture by the art of painting, so now we shall make language by the art of naming, or of rhetoric, or whatever it be.
No, not we; I said that too hastily.
For the ancients gave language its existing composite character;
and we, if we are to examine all these matters with scientific ability, must take it to pieces as they put it together and see whether the words, both the earliest and the later, are given systematically or not; for if they are strung together at haphazard, it is a poor, unmethodical performance, my dear Hermogenes.
Hermogenes
By Zeus, Socrates, may be it is.
Socrates
Well, do you believe you could take them to pieces in that way?
I do not believe I could.
Hermogenes
Then I am sure I could not.
Socrates
Shall we give up then or shall we do the best we can and try to see if we are able to understand even a little about them, and, just as we said to the gods a while ago that we knew nothing about the truth but were guessing at human opinion about them, so now, before we proceed, shall we say to ourselves that if anyone, whether we or someone else, is to make any analysis of names, he will have to analyze them in the way we have described, and we shall have to study them, as the saying is, with all our might?
Do you agree, or not?
Hermogenes
Yes, I agree most heartily.
Socrates
It will, I imagine, seem ridiculous that things are made manifest through imitation in letters and syllables; nevertheless it cannot be otherwise.
For there is no better theory upon which we can base the truth of the earliest names, unless you think we had better follow the example of the tragic poets, who, when they are in a dilemma, have recourse to the introduction of gods on machines.
So we may get out of trouble by saying that the gods gave the earliest names, and therefore they are right.
Is that the best theory for us?
Or perhaps this one, that we got the earliest names from some foreign folk and the foreigners are more ancient than we are?
Or that it is impossible to investigate them because of their antiquity, as is also the case with the foreign words?
All these are merely very clever evasions on the part of those who refuse to offer any rational theory of the correctness of the earliest names.
And yet if anyone is, no matter why, ignorant of the correctness of the earliest names, he cannot know about that of the later, since they can be explained only by means of the earliest, about which he is ignorant.
No, it is clear that anyone who claims to have scientific knowledge of names must be able first of all to explain the earliest names perfectly, or he can be sure that what he says about the later will be nonsense.
Or do you disagree?
Hermogenes
No, Socrates, not in the least.
Socrates
Now I think my notions about the earliest names are quite outrageous and ridiculous.
I will impart them to you, if you like; if you can find anything better, please try to impart it to me.
Hermogenes
I will do so.
Go on, and do not be afraid.
Socrates
First, then, the letter rho seems to me to be an instrument expressing all motion.
We have not as yet said why it has this name; but it evidently should be , for in old times we did not employ eta, but epsilon.
And the beginning of  is from , a foreign word equivalent to go.
So we should find that the ancient word corresponding to our modern form would be ; but now by the employment of the foreign word , change of epsilon to eta, and the insertion of nu it has become , though it ought to be  or .
And rest signifies the negation of motion, but is called  for euphony.
Well, the letter rho, as I was saying, appeared to be a fine instrument expressive of motion to the name-giver who wished to imitate rapidity, and he often applies it to motion.
In the first place, in the words flow and current he imitates their rapidity by this letter, then in trembling and in run, and also in such words as strike, break, rend, crush, crumble, whirl, he expresses the action of them all chiefly by means of the letter rho;
for he observed, I suppose, that the tongue is least at rest and most agitated in pronouncing this letter, and that is probably the reason why he employed it for these words.
Iota again, he employs for everything subtle, which can most readily pass through all things.
Therefore he imitates the nature of go and hasten by means of iota, just as he has imitated all such notions as shivering, seething, shake, and shock by means of phi, psi, sigma, and zeta, because those letters are pronounced with much breath.
Whenever he imitates that which resembles blowing, the giver of names always appears to use for the most part such letters.
And again he appears to have thought that the compression and pressure of the tongue in the pronunciation of delta and tau was naturally fitted to imitate the notion of binding and rest.
And perceiving that the tongue has a gliding movement most in the pronunciation of lambda, he made the words level, glide itself, sleek, glutinous, and the like to conform to it.
Where the gliding of the tongue is stopped by the sound of gamma he reproduced the nature of glutinous, sweet, and gluey.
And again, perceiving that nu is an internal sound, he made the words inside and within, assimilating the meanings to the letters,
and alpha again he assigned to greatness, and eta to length, because the letters are large.
He needed the sign  for the expression of round, and made it the chief element of the word.
And in this way the lawgiver appears to apply the other letters, making by letters and syllables a name for each and every thing, and from these names he compounds all the rest by imitation.
This, Hermogenes, appears to me to be the theory of the correctness of names, unless, indeed, Cratylus has some other view.
Hermogenes
Truly, Socrates, as I said in the beginning, Cratylus often troubles me a good deal; he declares that there is such a thing as correctness of names, but does not say clearly what it is; and so I cannot tell whether he speaks so obscurely about it on any given occasion intentionally or unintentionally.
So now, Cratylus, tell me, in the presence of Socrates, do you like what Socrates says about names, or have you a better theory to propose?
And if you have, tell us about it; then you will either learn from Socrates or instruct both him and me.
Cratylus
But, Hermogenes, do you think it is an easy matter to learn or teach any subject so quickly, especially so important an one as this, which appears to me to be one of the most important?
Hermogenes
No, by Zeus, I do not.
But I think Hesiod is right in saying:"If you can only add little to little, it is worth while."
So now if you can make even a little progress, do not shirk the trouble, but oblige Socrates you owe it to him and me.
Socrates
For that matter, Cratylus, I would not positively affirm any of the things I have said.
I merely expressed the opinions which I reached with the help of Hermogenes.
So far as I am concerned, you need not hesitate, and if your view is better than mine, I will accept it.
And I should not be at all surprised if it were better; for I think you have not only investigated such matters yourself but have been taught about them by others.
So if you have any better theory to propound, put me down as one of your pupils in the course on the correctness of names.
Cratylus
Yes, Socrates, I have, as you say, paid attention to these matters, and perhaps I might make you my pupil.
However, I am afraid the opposite is the case, and I am impelled to say to you what Achilles says in the "Prayers" to Ajax.
He says:"Ajax, descendant of Zeus, son of Telamon, chief of thy people,
All thou hast uttered is good in my sight and pleases my spirit."
And so, Socrates, your oracular utterances seem to me to be much to my mind, whether you are inspired by Euthyphro or some other Muse has dwelt within you all along without our knowing it.
Socrates
My excellent Cratylus, I myself have been marvelling at my own wisdom all along, and I cannot believe in it.
So I think we ought to reexamine my utterances.
For the worst of all deceptions is self-deception.
How can it help being terrible, when the deceiver is always present and never stirs from the spot?
So I think we must turn back repeatedly to what we have said and must try, as the poet says, to look "both forwards and backwards."
Then let us now see what we have said.
Correctness of a name, we say, is the quality of showing the nature of the thing named.
Shall we call that a satisfactory statement?
Cratylus
I am perfectly satisfied with it, Socrates.
Socrates
Names, then, are given with a view to instruction?
Cratylus
Certainly.
Socrates
Shall we, then; say that this instruction is an art and has its artisans?
Cratylus
Certainly.
Socrates
Who are they?
Cratylus
The lawgivers, as you said in the beginning.
Socrates
Shall we declare that this art arises in men like the other arts, or not?
What I mean is this:
Some painters are better, and others worse, are they not?
Cratylus
Certainly.
Socrates
And the better produce better works that is, their paintings and the others worse works?
And likewise some builders build better houses and others worse?
Cratylus
Yes.
Socrates
Then do some lawgivers produce better, and others worse works?
Cratylus
No; at that point I cease to agree.
Socrates
Then you do not think that some laws are better, and some worse?
Cratylus
No, I do not.
Socrates
And you do not, it appears, think that one name is better, and another worse?
Cratylus
No, I do not.
Socrates
Then all names are correct?
Cratylus
All that are really names.
Socrates
How about the name of our friend Hermogenes, which was mentioned a while ago?
Shall we say that it is not his name at all, unless he belongs to the race of Hermes, or that it is his name, but is incorrect?
Cratylus
I think, Socrates, that it is not his name at all; it appears to be his, but is really the name of some one else who possesses the nature that makes the name clear.
Socrates
And when anyone says that our friend is Hermogenes, is he not even speaking falsely?
For perhaps it is not even possible to say that he is Hermogenes, if he is not.
Cratylus
What do you mean?
Socrates
Do you mean to say that it is impossible to speak falsehood at all?
For there are, my dear Cratylus, many who do so, and who have done so in the past.
Cratylus
Why, Socrates, how could anyone who says that which he says, say that which is not?
Is not falsehood saying that which is not?
Socrates
Your reasoning is too clever for me at my age, my friend.
However, tell me this:
Do you think it is possible to speak falsehood, but not to say it?
Cratylus
Neither to speak nor to say it.
Socrates
Nor utter it or use it as a form of address?
For instance, if some one should meet you in hospitable fashion, should grasp your hand and say, "Well met, my friend from Athens, son of Smicrion, Hermogenes," would he be saying or speaking or uttering or addressing these words not to you, but to Hermogenes
or to nobody?
Cratylus
I think, Socrates, the man would be producing sounds without sense.
Socrates
Even that reply is welcome;
for I can ask whether the words he produced would be true, or false,
or partly true and partly false.
Even that would suffice.
Cratylus
I should say that the man in such a case was merely making a noise, going through purposeless motions, as if he were beating a bronze pot.
Socrates
Let us see, Cratylus, if we cannot come to terms somehow.
You would agree, would you not, that the name is one thing and the thing of which it is the name is another?
Cratylus
Yes, I should.
Socrates
And you agree that the name is an imitation of the thing named?
Cratylus
Most assuredly.
Socrates
And you agree that paintings also are imitations, though in a different way, of things?
Cratylus
Yes.
Socrates
Well then for perhaps I do not understand, and you may be right can both of these imitations, the paintings and the names, be assigned and applied to the things which they imitate, or not?
Cratylus
They can.
Socrates
First, then, consider this question:
Can we assign the likeness of the man to the man and that of the woman to the woman, and so forth?
Cratylus
Certainly.
Socrates
And can we conversely attribute that of the man to the woman, and the woman's to the man?
Cratylus
That is also possible.
Socrates
And are these assignments both correct, or only the former?
Cratylus
The former.
Socrates
The assignment, in short, which attributes to each that which belongs to it and is like it.
Cratylus
That is my view.
Socrates
To put an end to contentious argument between you and me, since we are friends, let me state my position.
I call that kind of assignment in the case of both imitations paintings and names correct, and in the case of names not only correct, but true; and the other kind, which gives and applies the unlike imitation, I call incorrect and, in the case of names, false.
Cratylus
But it may be, Socrates, that this incorrect assignment is possible in the case of paintings, and not in the case of names, which must be always correctly assigned.
Socrates
What do you mean?
What difference is there between the two?
Can I not step up to a man and say to him, "This is your portrait," and show him perhaps his own likeness or, perhaps, that of a woman?
And by "show" I mean bring before the sense of sight.
Cratylus
Certainly.
Socrates
Well, then, can I not step up to the same man again and say, "This is your name"?
A name is an imitation, just as a picture is.
Very well; can I not say to him, "This is your name," and then bring before his sense of hearing perhaps the imitation of himself, saying that it is a man, or perhaps the imitation of the female of the human species, saying that it is a woman?
Do you not believe that this is possible and sometimes happens?
Cratylus
I am willing to concede it, Socrates, and grant that you are right.
Socrates
That is a good thing for you to do, my friend, if I am right; for now we need no longer argue about the matter.
If, then, some such assignment of names takes place, we will call one kind speaking truth, and the other speaking falsehood.
But if this is accepted, and if it is possible to assign names incorrectly and to give to objects not the names that befit them, but sometimes those that are unfitting, it would be possible to treat verbs in the same way.
And if verbs and nouns can be assigned in this way, the same must be true of sentences; for sentences are, I conceive, a combination of verbs and nouns.
What do you say to that, Cratylus?
Cratylus
I agree; I think you are right.
Socrates
If, then, we compare the earliest words to sketches, it is possible in them, as in pictures, to reproduce all the colors and shapes, or not all; some may be wanting, and some may be added, and they may be too many or too large.
Is not that true?
Cratylus
Yes, it is.
Socrates
Then he who reproduces all, produces good sketches and pictures, and he who adds or takes away produces also sketches and pictures, but bad ones?
Cratylus
Yes.
Socrates
And how about him who imitates the nature of things by means of letters and syllables?
By the same principle, if he gives all that is appropriate, the image that is to say, the name will be good, and if he sometimes omits a little, it will be an image, but not a good one; and therefore some names are well and others badly made.
Is that not true?
Cratylus
Perhaps.
Socrates
Perhaps, then, one artisan of names will be good, and another bad?
Cratylus
Yes.
Socrates
The name of such an artisan was lawgiver?
Cratylus
Yes.
Socrates
Perhaps, then, by Zeus, as is the case in the other arts, one lawgiver may be good and another bad, if we accept our previous conclusions.
Cratylus
That is true.
But you see, Socrates, when by the science of grammar we assign these letters alpha, beta, and the rest to names, if we take away or add or transpose any letter, it is not true that the name is written, but written incorrectly; it is not written at all, but immediately becomes a different word, if any such thing happens to it.
Socrates
Perhaps we are not considering the matter in the right way.
Cratylus
Why not?
Socrates
It may be that what you say would be true of those things which must necessarily consist of a certain number or cease to exist at all, as ten, for instance, or any number you like, if you add or subtract anything is immediately another number; but this is not the kind of correctness which applies to quality or to images in general; on the contrary, the image must not by any means reproduce all the qualities of that which it imitates, if it is to be an image.
See if I am not right.
Would there be two things, Cratylus and the image of Cratylus, if some god should not merely imitate your color and form, as painters do, but should also make all the inner parts like yours, should reproduce the same flexibility and warmth, should put into them motion, life, and intellect, such as exist in you, and in short, should place beside you a duplicate of all your qualities?
Would there be in such an event Cratylus and an image of Cratylus, or two Cratyluses?
Cratylus
I should say, Socrates, two Cratyluses.
Socrates
Then don't you see, my friend, that we must look for some other principle of correctness in images and in names, of which we were speaking, and must not insist that they are no longer images if anything be wanting or be added?
Do you not perceive how far images are from possessing the same qualities as the originals which they imitate?
Cratylus
Yes, I do.
Socrates
Surely, Cratylus, the effect produced by the names upon the things of which they are the names would be ridiculous, if they were to be entirely like them in every respect.
For everything would be duplicated, and no one could tell in any case which was the real thing and which the name.
Cratylus
Quite true.
Socrates
Then do not be faint-hearted, but have the courage to admit that one name may be correctly and another incorrectly given; do not insist that it must have all the letters and be exactly the same as the thing named, but grant that an inappropriate letter may be employed.
But if a letter, then grant that also a noun in a clause, and if a noun, then also a clause in a sentence may be employed which is not appropriate to the things in question, and the thing may none the less be named and described, so long as the intrinsic quality of the thing named is retained, as is the case in the names of the letters of the alphabet, if you remember what Hermogenes and I were saying a while ago.
Cratylus
Yes, I remember.
Socrates
Very well, then.
So long as this intrinsic quality is present, even though the name have not all the proper letters, the thing will still be named; well, when it has all the proper letters; badly, when it has only a few of them.
Let us, then, grant this, my friend, or we shall get into trouble, like the belated night wanderers in the road at Aegina, and in very truth we shall be found to have arrived too late; otherwise you must look for some other principle of correctness in names, and must not admit that a name is the representation of a thing in syllables and letters.
For if you maintain both positions, you cannot help contradicting yourself.
Cratylus
Well, Socrates, I think what you say is reasonable, and I accept it.
Socrates
Then since we are agreed about this, let us consider the next point.
If a name, we say, is to be a good one, it must have the proper letters?
Cratylus
Yes.
Socrates
And the proper letters are those which are like the things named?
Cratylus
Yes, certainly.
Socrates
That is, then, the method by which wellgiven names are given.
But if any name is not well given, the greater part of it may perhaps, if it is to be an image at all, be made up of proper and like letters, but it may contain some inappropriate element, and is on that account not good or well made.
Is that our view?
Cratylus
I suppose, Socrates, there is no use in keeping up my contention; but I am not satisfied that it can be a name and not be well given.
Socrates
Are you not satisfied that the name is the representation of a thing?
Cratylus
Yes.
Socrates
And do you not think it is true that some names are composed of earlier ones and others are primary?
Cratylus
Yes.
Socrates
But if the primary names are to be representations of any things, can you suggest any better way of making them representations than by making them as much as possible like the things which they are to represent?
Or do you prefer the theory advanced by Hermogenes and many others, who claim that names are conventional and represent things to those who established the convention and knew the things beforehand, and that convention is the sole principle of correctness in names, and it makes no difference whether we accept the existing convention or adopt an opposite one according to which small would be called great and great small?
Which of these two theories do you prefer?
Cratylus
Representing by likeness the thing represented is absolutely and entirely superior to representation by chance signs.
Socrates
You are right.
Then if the name is like the thing, the letters of which the primary names are to be formed must be by their very nature like the things, must they not?
Let me explain.
Could a painting, to revert to our previous comparison, ever be made like any real thing, if there were no pigments out of which the painting is composed, which were by their nature like the objects which the painter's art imitates?
Is not that impossible?
Cratylus
Yes, it is impossible.
Socrates
In the same way, names can never be like anything unless those elements of which the names are composed exist in the first place and possess some kind of likeness to the things which the names imitate;
and the elements of which they are composed are the letters, are they not?
Cratylus
Yes.
Socrates
Then I must now ask you to consider with me the subject which Hermogenes and I discussed a while ago.
Do you think I am right in saying that rho is expressive of speed, motion, and hardness, or not?
Cratylus
You are right.
Socrates
And lambda is like smoothness, softness, and the other qualities we mentioned?
Cratylus
Yes.
Socrates
You know, of course, that we call the same thing  (hardness) which the Eretrians call ?
Cratylus
Certainly.
Socrates
Have rho and sigma both a likeness to the same thing, and does the final rho mean to them just what the sigma means to us, or is there to one of us no meaning?
Cratylus
They mean the same to both.
Socrates
In so far as rho and sigma are alike, or in so far as they are not?
Cratylus
In so far as they are alike.
Socrates
And are they alike in all respects?
Cratylus
Yes; at least for the purpose of expressing motion equally.
Socrates
But how about the lambda in ?
Does it not express the opposite of hardness?
Cratylus
Well, perhaps it has no right to be there, Socrates; it may be like the cases that came up in your talk with Hermogenes, when you removed or inserted letters where that was necessary.
I think you did right; and in this case perhaps we ought to put a rho in place of the lambda.
Socrates
You speak well.
However, do we not understand one another when anyone says , using the present pronunciation, and do you not now know what I mean?
Cratylus
Yes, but that is by custom, my friend.
Socrates
In saying "custom" do you think you are saying anything different from convention?
Do you not mean by "convention" that when I speak I have a definite meaning and you recognize that I have that meaning?
Is not that what you mean?
Cratylus
Yes.
Socrates
Then if you recognize my meaning when I speak, that is an indication given to you by me.
Cratylus
Yes.
Socrates
The indication comes from something which is unlike my meaning when I speak, if in your example  the lambda is unlike hardness; and if this is true, did you not make a convention with yourself, since both like and unlike letters, by the influence of custom and convention, produce indication?
And even if custom is entirely distinct from convention, we should henceforth be obliged to say that custom, not likeness, is the principle of indication, since custom, it appears, indicates both by the like and by the unlike.
And since we grant this, Cratylus for I take it that your silence gives consent both convention and custom must contribute something towards the indication of our meaning when we speak.
For, my friend, if you will just turn your attention to numbers, where do you think you can possibly get names to apply to each individual number on the principle of likeness, unless you allow agreement and convention on your part to control the correctness of names?
I myself prefer the theory that names are, so far as is possible, like the things named; but really this attractive force of likeness is, as Hermogenes says, a poor thing, and we are compelled to employ in addition this commonplace expedient, convention, to establish the correctness of names.
Probably language would be, within the bounds of possibility, most excellent when all its terms, or as many as possible, were based on likeness, that is to say, were appropriate, and most deficient under opposite conditions.
But now answer the next question.
What is the function of names, and what good do they accomplish?
Cratylus
I think, Socrates, their function is to instruct, and this is the simple truth, that he who knows the names knows also the things named.
Socrates
I suppose, Cratylus, you mean that when anyone knows the nature of the name and its nature is that of the thing he will know the thing also, since it is like the name, and the science of all things which are like each other is one and the same.
It is, I fancy, on this ground that you say whoever knows names will know things also.
Cratylus
You are perfectly right.
Socrates
Now let us see what this manner of giving instruction is, to which you refer, and whether there is another method, but inferior to this, or there is no other at all.
What do you think?
Cratylus
I think there is no other at all; this is both the best and the only method.
Socrates
Do you think this is also the method of discovering realities, and that he who has discovered the names has discovered also the things named; or do you think inquiry and discovery demand another method, and this belongs to instruction?
Cratylus
I most certainly think inquiry and discovery follow this same method and in the same way.
Socrates
Let us consider the matter, Cratylus.
Do you not see that he who in his inquiry after things follows names and examines into the meaning of each one runs great risks of being deceived?
Cratylus
How so?
Socrates
Clearly he who first gave names, gave such names as agreed with his conception of the nature of things.
That is our view, is it not?
Cratylus
Yes.
Socrates
Then if his conception was incorrect, and he gave the names according to his conception, what do you suppose will happen to us who follow him?
Can we help being deceived?
Cratylus
But, Socrates, surely that is not the case.
He who gave the names must necessarily have known; otherwise, as I have been saying all along, they would not be names at all.
And there is a decisive proof that the name-giver did not miss the truth, one which you must accept; for otherwise his names would not be so universally consistent.
Have you not yourself noticed in speaking that all names were formed by the same method and with the same end in view?
Socrates
But that, Cratylus, is no counter argument.
For if the giver of names erred in the beginning and thenceforth forced all other names into agreement with his own initial error, there is nothing strange about that.
It is just so sometimes in geometrical diagrams; the initial error is small and unnoticed, but all the numerous deductions are wrong, though consistent.
Every one must therefore give great care and great attention to the beginning of any undertaking, to see whether his foundation is right or not.
If that has been considered with proper care, everything else will follow.
However, I should be surprised if names are really consistent.
Let us review our previous discussion.
Names, we said, indicate nature to us, assuming that all things are in motion and flux.
Do you not think they do so?
Cratylus
Yes, and they indicate it correctly.
Socrates
Let us first take up again the word  (knowledge) and see how ambiguous it is, seeming to indicate that it makes our soul stand still () at things, rather than that it is carried round with them, so it is better to speak the beginning of it as we now do than to insert the epsilon and say ; we should insert an iota rather than an epsilon.
Then take  (firm), which expresses position and rest, not motion.
And  (inquiry) means much the same, that it stops () the flow.
And  (faithful) most certainly means that which stops () motion.
Then again, anyone can see that  (memory) expresses rest () in the soul, not motion.
On the other hand,  (error) and  (misfortune), if you consider merely the form of the names, will appear to be the same as  (intellect) and  and all the other names of good significance.
Moreover,  (ignorance) and  (unrestraint) also appear to be like them; for the former, , seems to be      (the progress of one who goes with God), and  seems to be exactly    (movement in company with things).
And so names which we believe have the very worst meanings appear to be very like those which have the best.
And I think we could, if we took pains, find many other words which would lead us to reverse our judgement and believe that the giver of names meant that things were not in progress or in motion, but were at rest.
Cratylus
But, Socrates, you see that most of the names indicate motion.
Socrates
What of that, Cratylus?
Are we to count names like votes, and shall correctness rest with the majority?
Are those to be the true names which are found to have that one of the two meanings which is expressed by the greater number?
Cratylus
That is not reasonable.
Socrates
No, not in the least, my friend.
Now let us drop this and return to the point at which we digressed.
A little while ago, you may remember, you said he who gave names must have known the things to which he gave them.
Do you still hold that opinion, or not?
Cratylus
Still.
Socrates
And you say that he who gave the first names also knew the things which he named?
Cratylus
Yes, he knew them.
Socrates
But from what names had he learned or discovered the things, if the first names had not yet been given, and if we declare that it is impossible to learn or discover things except by learning or ourselves discovering the names?
Cratylus
I think there is something in what you say, Socrates.
Socrates
How can we assert that they gave names or were lawgivers with knowledge, before any name whatsoever had been given, and before they knew any names, if things cannot be learned except through their names?
Cratylus
I think the truest theory of the matter, Socrates, is that the power which gave the first names to things is more than human, and therefore the names must necessarily be correct.
Socrates
Then, in your opinion, he who gave the names, though he was a spirit or a god, would have given names which made him contradict himself?
Or do you think there is no sense in what we were saying just now?
Cratylus
But, Socrates, those that make up one of the two classes are not really names.
Socrates
Which of the two, my excellent friend; the class of those which point towards rest or of those that point towards motion?
We agreed just now that the matter is not to be determined by mere numbers.
Cratylus
No; that would not be right, Socrates.
Socrates
Then since the names are in conflict, and some of them claim that they are like the truth, and others that they are, how can we decide, and upon what shall we base our decision?
Certainly not upon other names differing from these, for there are none.
No, it is plain that we must look for something else, not names, which shall show us which of these two kinds are the true names, which of them, that is to say, show the truth of things.
Cratylus
That is my opinion.
Socrates
Then if that is true, Cratylus, it seems that things may be learned without names.
Cratylus
So it appears.
Socrates
What other way is left by which you could expect to know them?
What other than the natural and the straightest way, through each other, if they are akin, and through themselves?
For that which is other and different from them would signify not them, but something other and different.
Cratylus
I think that is true.
Socrates
Stop for Heaven's sake!
Did we not more than once agree that names which are rightly given are like the things named and are images of them?
Cratylus
Yes.
Socrates
Then if it be really true that things can be learned either through names or through themselves which would be the better and surer way of learning?
To learn from the image whether it is itself a good imitation and also to learn the truth which it imitates, or to learn from the truth both the truth itself and whether the image is properly made?
Cratylus
I think it is certainly better to learn from the truth.
Socrates
How realities are to be learned or discovered is perhaps too great a question for you or me to determine; but it is worth while to have reached even this conclusion, that they are to be learned and sought for, not from names but much better through themselves than through names.
Cratylus
That is clear, Socrates.
Socrates
Then let us examine one further point to avoid being deceived by the fact that most of these names tend in the same direction.
Suppose it should prove that although those who gave the names gave them in the belief that all things are in motion and flux I myself think they did have that belief still in reality that is not the case, and the namegivers themselves, having fallen into a kind of vortex, are whirled about, dragging us along with them.
Consider, my worthy Cratylus, a question about which I often dream.
Shall we assert that there is any absolute beauty, or good, or any other absolute existence, or not?
Cratylus
I think there is, Socrates.
Socrates
Then let us consider the absolute, not whether a particular face, or something of that sort, is beautiful, or whether all these things are in flux.
Is not, in our opinion, absolute beauty always such as it is?
Cratylus
That is inevitable.
Socrates
Can we, then, if it is always passing away, correctly say that it is this, then that it is that, or must it inevitably, in the very instant while we are speaking, become something else and pass away and no longer be what it is?
Cratylus
That is necessary.
Socrates
How, then, can that which is never in the same state be anything?
For if it is ever in the same state, then obviously at that time it is not changing; and if it is always in the same state and is always the same, how can it ever change or move without relinquishing its own form?
Cratylus
It cannot do so at all.
Socrates
No, nor can it be known by anyone.
For at the moment when he who seeks to know it approaches, it becomes something else and different, so that its nature and state can no longer be known; and surely there is no knowledge which knows that which is in no state.
Cratylus
It is as you say.
Socrates
But we cannot even say that there is any knowledge, if all things are changing and nothing remains fixed;
for if knowledge itself does not change and cease to be knowledge, then knowledge would remain, and there would be knowledge;
but if the very essence of knowledge changes, at the moment of the change to another essence of knowledge there would be no knowledge, and if it is always changing, there will always be no knowledge, and by this reasoning there will be neither anyone to know nor anything to be known.
But if there is always that which knows and that which is known if the beautiful, the good, and all the other verities exist I do not see how there is any likeness between these conditions of which I am now speaking and flux or motion.
Now whether this is the nature of things, or the doctrine of Heracleitus and many others is true, is another question; but surely no man of sense can put himself and his soul under the control of names, and trust in names and their makers to the point of affirming that he knows anything; nor will he condemn himself and all things and say that there is no health in them, but that all things are flowing like leaky pots, or believe that all things are just like people afflicted with catarrh, flowing and running all the time.
Perhaps, Cratylus, this theory is true, but perhaps it is not.
Therefore you must consider courageously and thoroughly and not accept anything carelessly for you are still young and in your prime; then, if after investigation you find the truth, impart it to me.
Cratylus
I will do so.
However, I assure you, Socrates, that I have already considered the matter, and after toilsome consideration I think the doctrine of Heracleitus is much more likely to be true.
Socrates
Some other time, then, my friend, you will teach me, when you come back; but now go into the country as you have made ready to do; and Hermogenes here will go with you a bit.
Cratylus
Very well, Socrates, and I hope you also will continue to think of these matters.
Euthydemus
Crito
Socrates
Crito
Who was it, Socrates, that you were talking with yesterday at the Lyceum?
Why, there was such a crowd standing about you that when I came up in the hope of listening I could hear nothing distinctly: still, by craning over I got a glimpse, and it appeared to me that it was a stranger with whom you were talking.
Who was he?
Socrates
About which are you asking, Crito?
There were two of them, not one.
Crito
The man whom I mean was sitting next but one to you, on your right: between you was Axiochus' boy;
and he, Socrates, seemed to me to have grown a great deal, so as to look almost the same age as my Critobulus,
who is rather puny whereas this boy has come on finely, and has a noble air about him.
Socrates
Euthydemus is the person to whom you refer, Crito, and the one sitting on my left was his brother, Dionysodorus.
He too takes part in our discussions.
Crito
Neither of them is known to me, Socrates.
A pair of fresh additions, I suppose, to our sophists.
Where do they hail from, and what science do they profess?
Socrates
By birth I believe they belong to these parts, that is to say, Chios; they went out as colonists to Thurii, but have been exiled thence and have spent a good many years now in various parts of this country.
As to what you ask of their profession, it is a wonderful one, Crito.
These two men are absolutely omniscient: I never knew before what "all-round sportsmen" were.
They are a pair of regular all-round fighters not in the style of the famous all-round athletes, the two brothers of Acamania; they could fight with their bodies only.
But these two, in the first place, are most formidable in body and in fight against all comers for they are not only well skilled themselves in fighting under arms, but are able to impart that skill, for a fee, to another; and further, they are most competent also to fight the battle of the law-courts and teach others how to speak, or to have composed for them, such speeches as may win their suits.
Formerly they had merely some ability for this; but now they have put the finishing touch to their skill as all-round sportsmen.
The one feat of fighting yet unperformed by them they have now accomplished, so that nobody dares stand up to them for a moment; such a faculty they have acquired for wielding words as their weapons and confuting any argument as readily if it be true as if it be false.
And so I, Crito, am minded to place myself in these two gentlemen's hands; for they say it would take them but a little while to make anyone else clever in just the same way.
Crito
What, Socrates!
Are you not afraid, at your time of life, that you may be too old for that now?
Socrates
Not at all, Crito: I have enough proof and reassurance to the contrary.
These same two persons were little less than old men at the time of their taking up this science, which I desire to have, of disputation.
Last year, or the year before, they were as yet without their science.
The only thing I am afraid of is that I may bring the same disgrace upon our two visitors as upon Connus, son of Metrobius, the harper, who is still trying to teach me the harp; so that the boys who go to his lessons with me make fun of me and call Connus "the gaffers' master."
This makes me fear that someone may make the same reproach to the two strangers; and, for aught I know, their dread of this very thing may make them unwilling to accept me.
So, Crito, just as in the other case I have persuaded some elderly men to come and have lessons with me, in this affair I am going to try and persuade another set.
Now you, I am sure, will come with me to school;
and we will take your sons as a bait to entice them, for I have no doubt that the attraction of these young fellows will make them include us also in the class.
Crito
I have no objection, Socrates, if you think fit to do so.
But first you must explain to me what is the science these men profess, that I may know what it is we are going to learn.
Socrates
You shall be told at once; for I cannot plead that I did not give them my attention, since I not only attended closely but remember and will try to expound the whole thing from the beginning.
By some providence I chanced to be sitting in the place where you saw me, in the undressing-room, alone, and was just intending to get up and go; but the moment I did so, there came my wonted spiritual sign.
So I sat down again, and after a little while these two persons entered Euthydemus and Dionysodorus and accompanying them, quite a number, as it seemed to me, of their pupils: the two men came in and began walking round inside the cloister.
Hardly had they taken two or three turns, when in stepped Cleinias, who you say has come on so much, and you are right: behind him was a whole troop of lovers, and among them Ctesippus, a young fellow from Paeania, of gentle birth and breeding, except for a certain insolence of youth.
So when Cleinias as he entered caught sight of me sitting there alone, he came straight across and sat beside me on my right, just as you say.
Dionysodorus and Euthydemus, when they saw him, stood at first talking with each other, and casting an occasional glance at us for my attention was fixed on them but then one of them, Euthydemus, took a seat by the youth, and the other next to me on my left; the rest, where each happened to find one.
So I greeted the two brothers, as not having seen them for some time; after that I said to Cleinias: My dear Cleinias, these two men, you know, are skilled not in little things, but in great.
For they understand all about war, that is, as much as is needful for him who is to be a good general; both the tactics and the strategy of armies, and all the teaching of troops under arms; and they can also enable one to get redress in the law courts for a wrong that one may have suffered.
When I had said this, I saw they despised me for it, and they both laughed, looking at each other; then Euthydemus said: No, no, Socrates, we do not make those matters our business now; we deal with them as diversions.
At this I wondered and said: Your business must be a fine one, if such great matters are indeed diversions to you; so I beseech you, tell me what this fine business is.
Virtue, Socrates, he replied, is what we deem ourselves able to purvey in a pre-eminently excellent and speedy manner.
Good heavens, I exclaimed, a mighty affair indeed!
Where did you have the luck to pick it up?
I was still considering you, as I remarked just now, to be chiefly skilled in fighting under arms, and so spoke of you in those terms: for when you visited, our city before, this, I recollect, was the profession you made.
But if you now in truth possess this other knowledge, have mercy you see I address you just as though you were a couple of gods, beseeching you to forgive my former remarks.
But make sure, Euthydemus and Dionysodorus, that you spoke the truth: for the vastness of your promise gives me some excuse for disbelieving.
You may be sure, Socrates, they replied, it is as we say.
Then I congratulate you on your acquisition far more than I do the great king on his empire: only tell me whether you intend to exhibit this science of yours, or what you have determined to do.
We are here for the very purpose, Socrates, of exhibiting and expounding it to anyone who wishes to learn.
Well, I guarantee that all who do not possess it will wish to myself to begin with, then Cleinias here and, besides us, Ctesippus and all these others, I said, showing him the lovers of Cleinias, who were by this time standing about us.
For Ctesippus, as it happened, was sitting some way from Cleinias, I noticed; and by chance, as Euthydemus leant forward in talking to me he obscured Ctesipus' view of Cleinias, who was between us.
Then Ctesippus, desiring to gaze on his favorite and being also an eager listener, led the way by jumping up and placing himself opposite us; and this made the others, on seeing what he did, stand around us, both Cleinias' lovers and the followers of Euthydemus and Dionysodorus.
Pointing to these, I told Euthydemus that they were all ready to learn; to which Ctesippus assented with great eagerness, and so did the rest; and they all joined in urging the two men to exhibit the power of their wisdom.
On this I remarked: My good Euthydemus and Dionysodorus, you must do your very best to gratify my friends and, for my sake also, to give us an exhibition.
To do it in full, of course, would obviously be a lengthy performance: but tell me one thing will you be able to make a good man of him only who is already convinced that he should learn of you, or of him also who is not yet so convinced, owing to an absolute disbelief that virtue is a thing that can be learnt or that you are teachers of it?
Come now, is it the business of this same art to persuade such a man that virtue is teachable and that you are the men of whom one may best learn it, or does this need some other art?
No, this same one can do it, Socrates, said Dionysodorus.
Then you two, Dionysodorus, I said, would be the best persons now on earth to incite one to the pursuit of knowledge and the practice of virtue?
We think so, at least, Socrates.
Well then, please defer the display of all the rest to some other occasion, I said, and exhibit this one thing.
You are to persuade this young fellow here that he ought to ensue wisdom and practise virtue, and so you will oblige both me and all these present.
This youth happens to be in just the sort of condition I speak of; and I and all of us here are at this moment anxious for him to become as good as possible.
He is the son of Axiochus, son of the former Alcibiades, and is own cousin to the Alcibiades that now is: his name is Cleinias.
He is young; and so we have fears for him, as well one may for a young man, lest someone forestall us and turn his inclination to some other course of life, and so corrupt him.
Hence your arrival now is most happy.
Come now, if it is all the same to you, make trial of the lad and talk with him in our presence.
When I had thus spoken, in almost these very words, Euthydemus answered in a tone both manly and dashing: Oh, it is all the same to us, Socrates, provided the youth is willing to answer us.
Why, in fact, I said, that is just what he is used to: these people here are constantly coming to him and asking him a number of questions and debating with him, so he is a fairly fearless answerer.
What ensued, Crito, how am I to relate in proper style?
For no slight matter it is to be able to recall in description such enormous knowledge as theirs.
Consequently, like the poets, I must needs begin my narrative with an invocation of the Muses and Memory.
Well, Euthydemus set to work, so far as I remember, in terms very much the same as these: Cleinias, which sort of men are the learners, the wise or the foolish?
At this the young man, feeling the embarrassment of the question, blushed and glanced at me in his helplessness.
So I, perceiving his confusion, said: Have no fear, Cleinias; answer bravely, whichever you think it is: for perchance he is doing you the greatest service in the world.
Meanwhile Dionysodorus leant over a little to me, with a broad smile on his face, and whispered in my ear: Let me tell you, Socrates, beforehand that, whichever way the lad answers, he will be confuted.
While he was saying this, Cleinias made his reply, so that I was unable even to advise the boy to be wary: he replied that it was the wise who were the learners.
Then Euthydemus asked: And are there persons whom you call teachers, or not?
He agreed that there were.
And the teachers of the learners are teachers in the same way as your lute-master and your writing-master, I suppose, were teachers of you and the other boys, while you were pupils?
He assented.
Now, of course, when you were learning, you did not yet know the things you were learning?
No, he said.
So were you wise, when you did not know those things?
No, to be sure, he said.
Then if not wise, foolish?
Certainly.
So when you learnt what you did not know, you learnt while being foolish.
To this the lad nodded assent.
Hence it is the foolish who learn, Cleinias, and not the wise, as you suppose.
When he had thus spoken, all those followers of Dionysodorus and Euthydemus raised a cheer and a laugh, like a chorus at the signal of their director; and before the boy could fairly and fully recover his breath Dionysodorus took up the cudgels and said: Well now, Cleinias, whenever your writing-master dictated from memory, which of the boys learnt the piece recited, the wise or the foolish?
The wise, said Cleinias.
So it is the wise who learn, and not the foolish: hence the answer you gave just now to Euthydemus was a bad one.
Thereupon arose a great deal of laughter and loud applause from the pair's adorers, in admiration of their cleverness; while we on our side were dismayed and held our peace.
Then Euthydemus, observing our dismay, and seeking to astonish us still further, would not let the boy go, but went on questioning him and, like a skilful dancer, gave a twofold twist to his questions on the same point: Now, do the learners learn what they know, he asked, or what they do not?
Then Dionysodorus whispered to me again softly: Here comes a second one, Socrates, just like the first.
Heavens!
I replied: surely the first question served you well enough.
All our questions, Socrates, he said, are like that; they leave no escape.
And consequently, as it seems to me, I remarked, you have this high repute among your disciples.
Meanwhile Cleinias answered Euthydemus, that learners learnt what they did not know; so he had to meet the same course of questions as before:
Well then, asked the other, do you not know your letters?
Yes, he said.
All of them?
He admitted it.
Now when anyone dictates some piece or other, does he not dictate letters?
He admitted it.
And he dictates things of which you know something, since you know all of them?
He admitted this too.
Well now, said the other, surely you do not learn whatever such a person dictates; it is rather he who does not know his letters that learns?
No, he replied; I learn.
Then you learn what you know, since you know all your letters.
He agreed.
So your answer was not correct, he said.
The last word was hardly out of Euthydemus' mouth when Dionysodorus caught, as it were, the ball of the argument and, aiming at the boy again, said: Euthydemus is deceiving you, Cleinias.
Tell me, is not learning the reception of knowledge of that which one learns?
Cleinias agreed.
And is not knowing, he went on, just having knowledge at the time?
He assented.
So that not knowing is not yet having knowledge?
He agreed with him.
Then are those who receive anything those who have it already, or those who have it not?
Those who have it not.
And you have admitted that those who do not know belong also to this class of those who have it not?
He nodded assent.
And the learners belong to the class of the receiving and not to that of the having?
He agreed.
Hence it is those who do not know that learn, Cleinias, and not those who know.
Euthydemus was proceeding to press the youth for the third fall, when I, perceiving the lad was going under, and wishing to give him some breathing-space lest he should shame us by losing heart, encouraged him with these words:
Cleinias, do not be surprised that these arguments seem strange to you;
for perhaps you do not discern what our two visitors are doing to you.
They are acting just like the celebrants of the Corybantic rites, when they perform the enthronement of the person whom they are about to initiate.
There, as you know, if you have been through it, they have dancing and merrymaking: so here these two are merely dancing about you and performing their sportive gambols with a view to your subsequent initiation.
You must now, accordingly, suppose you are listening to the first part of the professorial mysteries.
First of all, as Prodicus says, you have to learn about the correct use of words the very point that our two visitors are making plain to you, namely, that you were unaware that learning is the name which people apply on the one hand to the case of a man who, having originally no knowledge about some matter, in course of time receives such knowledge; and on the other hand the same word is applied when, having the knowledge already, he uses that knowledge for the investigation of the same matter whether occurring in action or in speech.
It is true that they tend rather to call it "understanding" than "learning", but occasionally they call it learning too; and this point, as our friends are demonstrating, has escaped your notice how the same word is used for people who are in the opposite conditions of knowing and not knowing.
A similar point underlay the second question, where they asked you whether people learn what they know, or what they do not.
Such things are the sport of the sciences and that is why I tell you these men are making game of you; I call it sport because, although one were to learn many or even all of such tricks, one would be not a whit the wiser as to the true state of the matters in hand, but only able to make game of people, thanks to the difference in the sense of the words, by tripping them up and overturning them; just as those who slyly pull stools away from persons who are about to sit down make merry and laugh when they see one sprawling on one's back.
So far, then, you are to regard these gentlemen's treatment of you as mere play: but after this they will doubtless display to you their own serious object, while I shall keep them on the track and see that they fulfil the promise they gave me.
They said they would exhibit their skill in exhortation; but instead, I conceive, they thought fit to make sport with you first.
So now, Euthydemus and Dionysodorus, let us have done with your sport: I daresay you have had as much as you want.
What you have next to do is to give us a display of exhorting this youth as to how he should devote himself to wisdom and virtue.
But first I shall explain to you how I regard this matter and how I desire to hear it dealt with.
If I strike you as treating it in a crude and ridiculous manner, do not laugh me to scorn; for in my eagerness to listen to your wisdom I shall venture to improvise in your presence.
So both you and your disciples must restrain yourselves and listen without laughing; and you, son of Axiochus, answer me this:
Do all we human beings wish to prosper?
Or is this question one of the absurdities I was afraid of just now?
For I suppose it is stupid merely to ask such things, since every man must wish to prosper.
Everyone in the world, said Cleinias.
Well then, I asked, as to the next step, since we wish to prosper, how can we prosper?
Will it be if we have many good things?
Or is this an even sillier question than the other?
For surely this too must obviously be so.
He agreed.
Come now, of things that are, what sort do we hold to be really good ?
Or does it appear to be no difficult matter, and no problem for an important person, to find here too a ready answer?
Anyone will tell us that to be rich is good, surely?
Quite true, he said.
Then it is the same with being healthy and handsome, and having the other bodily endowments in plenty?
He agreed.
Again, it is surely clear that good birth and talents and distinctions in one's own country are good things.
He admitted it.
Then what have we still remaining, I asked, in the class of goods?
What of being temperate, and just, and brave?
I bay you tell me, Cleinias, do you think we shall be right in ranking these as goods, or in rejecting them?
For it may be that someone will dispute it.
How does it strike you?
They are goods; said Cleinias.
Very well, I went on, and where in the troupe shall we station wisdom?
Among the goods, or how?
Among the goods.
Then take heed that we do not pass over any of the goods that may deserve mention.
I do not think we are leaving any out, said Cleinias.
Hereupon I recollected one and said: Yes, by Heaven, we are on the verge of omitting the greatest of the goods.
What is that?
he asked.
Good fortune, Cleinias: a thing which all men, even the worst fools, refer to as the greatest of goods.
You are right, he said.
Once again I reconsidered and said: We have almost made ourselves laughing-stocks, you and I, son of Axiochus, for our visitors.
What is wrong now? he asked.
Why, after putting good fortune in our former list, we have just been discussing the same thing again.
What is the point?
Surely it is ridiculous, when a thing has been before us all the time, to set it forth again and go over the same ground twice.
To what are you referring? he asked.
Wisdom, I replied, is presumably good fortune: even a child could see that.
He wondered at this he is still so young and simple-minded:
then I, perceiving his surprise, went on: Can you be unaware, Cleinias, that for success in flute-music it is the flute-players that have the best fortune?
He agreed to this.
Then in writing and reading letters it will be the schoolmasters.
Certainly.
Well now, for the dangers of a sea-voyage, do you consider any pilots to he more fortunate, as a general rule, than the wise ones?
No, to be sure.
Well, then, suppose you were on a campaign, with which kind of general would you prefer to share both the peril and the luck a wise one, or an ignorant?
With a wise one.
Well then, supposing you were sick, with which kind of doctor would you like to venture yourself a wise one, or an ignorant?
With a wise one.
And your reason, I said, is this, that you would fare with better fortune in the hands of a wise one than of an ignorant one?
He assented.
So that wisdom everywhere causes men to be fortunate:
since I presume she could never err, but must needs be right in act and result; otherwise she could be no longer wisdom.
We came to an agreement somehow or other in the end that the truth in general was this: when wisdom is present, he with whom it is present has no need of good fortune as well; and as we had agreed on this I began to inquire of him over again what we should think, in this case, of our previous agreements.
For we agreed, said I, that if many goods were present to us we should be happy and prosper.
Yes, he said.
Then would we be happy because of our present goods, if they gave us no benefit, or if they gave us some?
If they gave us benefit, he said.
And would a thing benefit us if we merely had it and did not use it?
For instance, if we had a lot of provisions, but did not eat them, or liquor, and did not drink it, could we be said to be benefited?
Of course not, he answered.
Well then, if every craftsman found the requisites for his particular work all ready prepared for him, and then made no use of them, would he prosper because of these acquisitions, as having acquired all the things necessary for a craftsman to have at hand?
For example, if a carpenter were furnished with all his tools and a good supply of wood, but did no carpentry, is it possible he could be benefited by what he had got?
By no means, he said.
Well now, suppose a man had got wealth and all the goods that we mentioned just now, but made no use of them; would he be happy because of his possessing these goods?
Surely not, Socrates.
So it seems one must not merely have acquired such goods if one is to be happy, but use them too; else there is no benefit gained from their possession.
True.
Then have we here enough means, Cleinias, for making a man happy in the possession of these goods and using them?
I think so.
Shall we say, I asked, if he uses them rightly, or just as much if he does not?
If rightly.
Well answered, I said; for I suppose there is more mischief when a man uses anything wrongly than when he lets it alone.
In the one case there is evil; in the other there is neither evil nor good.
May we not state it so?
He agreed.
To proceed then: in the working and use connected with wood, is there anything else that effects the right use than the knowledge of carpentry?
Surely not, he said.
Further, I presume that in the working connected with furniture it is knowledge that effects the right work.
Yes, he said.
Then similarly, I went on, in the use of the goods we mentioned at first wealth and health and beauty was it knowledge that showed the way to the right use of all those advantages and rectified their conduct, or was it something else?
Knowledge, he replied.
So that knowledge, it would seem, supplies mankind not only with good luck, but with welfare, in all that he either possesses or conducts.
He agreed.
Then can we, in Heaven's name, get any benefit from all the other possessions without understanding and wisdom?
Shall we say that a man will profit more by possessing much and doing much when he has no sense, than he will if he does and possesses little?
Consider it this way: would he not err less if he did less; and so, erring less, do less ill; and hence, doing less ill, be less miserable?
Certainly, he said.
In which of the two cases, when one is poor or when one is rich, will one be more likely to do less?
When one is poor, he said.
And when one is weak, or when one is strong?
Weak.
And when one has high position, or has none?
None.
When one is brave and self-controlled, will one do less, or when one is a coward?
A coward.
So too, when idle rather than busy?
He agreed.
And slow rather than quick, and dim of sight and hearing rather than sharp?
We agreed with each other as to these and all such cases.
To sum up then, Cleinias, I proceeded, it seems that, as regards the whole lot of things which at first we termed goods, the discussion they demand is not on the question of how they are in themselves and by nature goods, but rather, I conceive, as follows: if they are guided by ignorance, they are greater evils than their opposites, according as they are more capable of ministering to their evil guide; whereas if understanding and wisdom guide them, they are greater goods; but in themselves neither sort is of any worth.
I think the case appears, he replied, to be as you suggest.
Now what result do we get from our statements?
Is it not precisely that, of all the other things, not one is either good or bad, but of these two, wisdom is good and ignorance bad?
He agreed.
Let us consider then, I said, the further conclusion that lies before us.
Since we are all eager to be happy, and since we were found to become so by not only using things but using them aright, while knowledge, we saw, was that which provided the rightness and good fortune, it seems that every man must prepare himself by all available means so that he may be as wise as possible.
Is it not so?
Yes, he said.
And if a man thinks, as well he may, that he ought to get this endowment from his father much more than money, and also from his guardians and his ordinary friends, and from those who profess to be his lovers, whether strangers or fellow-citizens praying and beseeching them to give him his share of wisdom; there is no disgrace, Cleinias, or reprobation in making this a reason for serving and being a slave to either one's lover or any man, and being ready to perform any service that is honorable in one's eagerness to become wise.
Is not this your view? I asked.
I think you are perfectly right, he replied.
Yes, Cleinias, I went on, if wisdom is teachable, and does not present itself to mankind of its own accord for this is a question that we have still to consider as not yet agreed on by you and me.
For my part, Socrates, he said, I think it is teachable.
At this I was glad, and said: Well spoken indeed, my excellent friend!
How good of you to relieve me of a long inquiry into this very point, whether wisdom is teachable or not teachable!
So now, since you think it is both teachable and the only thing in the world that makes man happy and fortunate, can you help saying that it is necessary to pursue wisdom or intending to pursue it yourself?
Why, said he, I do say so, Socrates, with all my might.
So I, delighted to hear this, said: There, Dionysodorus and Euthydemus, is my illustration of what I desire a hortatory argument to be rough and ready, perhaps, and expressed at laborious length: now let either of you who wishes to do so give us an example of an artist's handling of this same matter.
If you do not wish to do that, let your display begin where I left off, and show the lad whether he ought to acquire every kind of knowledge, or whether there is a single sort of it which one must obtain if one is to be both happy and a good man, and what it is.
For as I was saying at the outset, it really is a matter of great moment to us that this youth should become wise and good.
These were my words, Crito; and I set about giving the closest attention to what should follow, and observing in what fashion they would deal with the question, and how they would start exhorting the youth to practise wisdom and virtue.
So then the elder of them, Dionysodorus, entered first upon the discussion, and we all turned our eyes on him expecting to hear, there and then, some wonderful arguments.
And this result we certainly got; for wondrous, in a way, Crito, was the argument that the man then ushered forth, which is worth your hearing as a notable incitement to virtue.
Tell me, Socrates, he said, and all you others who say you desire this youth to become wise, whether you say this in jest or truly and earnestly desire it.
At this I reflected that previously, as it seemed, they took us to be jesting, when we urged them to converse with the youth, and hence they made a jest of it and did not take it seriously.
This reflection therefore made me insist all the more that we were in deadly earnest.
Then Dionysodorus said: Yet be careful, Socrates, that you do not have to deny what you say now.
I know what I am about, I said: I know I shall never deny it.
Well now, he proceeded; you tell me you wish him to become wise?
Certainly.
And at present, be asked, is Cleinias wise or not?
He says he is not yet so he is no vain pretender.
And you, he went on, wish him to become wise, and not to be ignorant?
We agreed.
So you wish him to become what he is not, and to be no longer what he now is.
When I heard this I was confused; and he, striking in on my confusion, said: Of course then, since you wish him to be no longer what he now is, you wish him, apparently, to be dead.
And yet what valuable friends and lovers they must be, who would give anything to know their darling was dead and gone!
Ctesippus, on hearing this, was annoyed on his favorite's account, and said: Stranger of Thurii, were it not rather a rude thing to say, I should tell you, ill betide your design of speaking so falsely of me and my friends as to make out what to me is almost too profane even to repeat that I could wish this boy to be dead and gone!
Why, Ctesippus, said Euthydemus, do you think it possible to lie?
By the gods, I do, he replied: I should be mad otherwise.
Do you mean, when one tells the thing about which one is telling, or when one does not?
When one tells it, he said.
Then if you tell it, you tell just that thing which you tell, of all that are, and nothing else whatever?
Of course,
said Ctesippus.
Now the thing that you tell is a single one, distinct from all the others there are.
Certainly.
Then the person who tells that thing tells that which is?
Yes.
But yet, surely he who tells what is, and things that are, tells the truth: so that Dionysodorus, if he tells things that are, tells the truth and speaks no lie about you.
Yes, he said; but he who speaks these things, said Ctesippus, Euthydemus, does not say things that are.
Then Euthydemus asked him: And the things which are not, surely are not?
They are not.
Then nowhere can the things that are not be?
Nowhere.
Then is it possible for anyone whatever so to deal with these things that are not as to make them be when they are nowhere?
I think not, said Ctesippus.
Well now, when orators speak before the people, do they do nothing?
No, they do something, he replied.
Then if they do, they also make?
Yes.
Now, is speaking doing and making?
He agreed that it is.
No one, I suppose, speaks what is not for thereby he would be making something; and you have agreed that one cannot so much as make what is not so that, by your account, no one speaks what is false, while if Dionysodorus speaks, he speaks what is true and is.
Yes, in faith, Euthydemus, said Ctesippus; but somehow or other he speaks what is, only not as it is.
How do you mean, Ctesippus? said Dionysodorus.
Are there persons who tell things as they are?
Why surely, he replied, there are gentlemen people who speak the truth?
Well, he went on, good things are in good case, bad in bad, are they not?
He assented.
And you admit that gentlemen tell things as they are.
I do.
Then, Ctesippus, good people speak evil of evil things, if they speak of them as they are.
Yes, I can tell you, very much so, when for instance they speak of evil men; among whom, if you take my advice, you will beware of being included, that the good may not speak ill of you.
For, I assure you, the good speak ill of the evil.
And they speak greatly of the great, asked Euthydemus, and hotly of the hot?
Certainly, I presume, said Ctesippus: I know they speak frigidly of the frigid, and call their way of arguing frigid.
You are turning abusive, Ctesippus, said Dionysodorus, quite abusive!
Not I, on my soul, Dionysodorus, for I like you: I am only giving you a friendly hint, and endeavoring to persuade you never to say anything so tactless in my presence as that I wish these my most highly valued friends to be dead and gone.
So then I, observing that they were getting rather savage with each other, began to poke fun at Ctesippus, saying: Ctesippus, my feeling is that we ought to accept from our visitors what they tell us, if they are so good as to give it, and should not quarrel over a word.
For if they understand how to do away with people in such sort as to change them from wicked and witless to honest and intelligent, and that too whether they have discovered for themselves or learnt from somebody else this peculiar kind of destruction or undoing, which enables them to destroy a man in his wickedness and set him up again in honesty; if they understand this and obviously they do; you know they said that their newly discovered art was to turn wicked men into good let us then accord them this power; let them destroy the lad for us, and make him sensible, and all the rest of us likewise.
If you young fellows are afraid, let the experiment be made on me as a "corpus vile"; for I, being an elderly person, am ready to take the risk and put myself in the hands of Dionysodorus here, as if he were the famous Medea of Colchis.
Let him destroy me, and if he likes let him boil me down, or do to me whatever he pleases: only he must make me good.
Then Ctesippus said: I too, Socrates, am ready to offer myself to be skinned by the strangers even more, if they choose, than they are doing now, if my hide is not to end by being made into a wine-skin, like that of Marsyas, but into the shape of virtue.
And yet Dionysodorus here believes I am vexed with him.
I am not vexed at all; I only contradict the remarks which I think he has improperly aimed at me.
Come now, my generous Dionysodorus, do not call contradiction abuse: abuse is quite another thing.
On this Dionysodorus said: As though there were such a thing as contradiction, Is that the way you argue, Ctesippus?
Yes, to be sure, he replied, indeed I do; and do you, Dionysodorus, hold that there is not?
Well, you at any rate, he said, could not prove that you had ever heard a single person contradicting another.
Is that so?
he replied: well, let us hear now whether I can prove a case of it Ctesippus contradicting Dionysodorus.
Now, will you make that good?
Certainly, he said.
Well then, proceeded the other, each thing that is has its own description?
Certainly.
Then do you mean, as each is, or as it is not?
As it is.
Yes, he said, for if you recollect, Ctesippus, we showed just now that no one speaks of a thing as it is not; since we saw that no one speaks what is not.
Well, what of that?
asked Ctesippus: are you and I contradicting any the less?
Now tell me, he said, could we contradict if we both spoke the description of the same thing?
In this case should we not surely speak the same words?
He agreed.
But when neither of us speaks the description of the thing, he asked, then we should contradict?
Or in this case shall we say that neither of us touched on the matter at all?
This also he admitted.
Well now, when I for my part speak the description of the thing, while you give another of another thing, do we contradict then?
Or do I describe the thing, while you do not describe it at all?
How can he who does not describe contradict him who does?
At this Ctesippus was silent; but I, wondering at the argument, said: How do you mean, Dionysodorus?
For, to be plain with you, this argument, though I have heard it from many people on various occasions, never fails to set me wondering you know the followers of Protagoras made great use of it, as did others even before his time, but to me it always seems to have a wonderful way of upsetting not merely other views but itself also and I believe I shall learn the truth of it from you far better than from anyone else.
There is no such thing as speaking false?
that is the substance of your statement, is it not?
Either one must speak and speak the truth, or else not speak?
He agreed.
Then shall we say that speaking false "is not," but thinking false "is"?
No, it is the same with thinking, he said.
So neither is there any false opinion, I said, at all.
No, he said.
Nor ignorance, nor ignorant men; or must not ignorance occur, if it ever can, when we put things falsely?
Certainly, he said.
But there is no such thing as this, I said.
No, he said.
Is it merely to save your statement, Dionysodorus, that you state it so just to say something startling or is it really and truly your view that there is no such thing as an ignorant man?
But you, he replied, are to refute me.
Well, does your argument allow of such a thing as refutation, if there is nobody to speak false?
There is no such thing, said Euthydemus.
So neither did Dionysodorus just now bid me refute him?I asked.
No, for how can one bid something that is not?
Do you bid such a thing?
Well, Euthydemus, I said, it is because I do not at all understand these clever devices and palpable hits: I am only a dull sort of thinker.
And so I may perhaps be going to say something rather clownish; but you must forgive me.
Here it is: if there is no such thing as speaking false or thinking false or being stupid, surely there can be no making a mistake either, when one does something.
For in doing it there is no mistaking the thing that is done.
You will state it so, will you not?
Certainly, he said.
My clownish question, I went on, is now already before you.
If we make no mistake either in doing or saying or intending, I ask you what in Heaven's name, on that assumption, is the subject you two set up to teach.
Or did you not say just now that your speciality was to put any man who wished in the way of learning virtue?
Now really, Socrates, interposed Dionysodorus, are you such an old dotard as to recollect now what we said at first, and will you now recollect what I may have said last year, and yet be at a loss how to deal with the arguments urged at the moment?
Well, you see, I replied, they are so very hard, and naturally so; for they fall from the lips of wise men; and this is further shown by the extreme difficulty of dealing with this last one you put forward.
For what on earth do you mean, Dionysodorus, by saying I am at a loss how to deal with it?
Or is it clear that you mean I am at a loss how to refute it?
You must tell me what else your phrase can intend, "at a loss how to deal with the arguments."
But it is not so very hard to deal with that phrase of yours, he said.
Just answer me.
Before you answer me, Dionysodorus? I protested.
You refuse to answer?
he said.
Is it fair?
Oh yes, it is fair enough, he replied
On what principle?
I asked: or is it plainly on this one that you present yourself to us at this moment as universally skilled in discussion, and thus can tell when an answer is to be given, and when not?
So now you will not answer a word, because you discern that you ought not to.
What nonsense you talk, he said, instead of answering as you should.
Come, good sir, do as I bid you and answer, since you confess to my wisdom.
Well then, I must obey, I said, and of necessity, it seems; for you are the master here.
Now for your question.
Then tell me, do things that "intend" have life when they intend, or do lifeless things do it too?
Only those that have life.
Now do you know any phrase that has life?
Upon my soul, I do not.
Why then did you ask just now what my phrase intended?
Of course I made a great mistake, I said: I am such a dullard.
Or perhaps it was not a mistake, and I was right in saying what I did, that phrases intend.
Do you say I was mistaken or not?
If I was not, then you will not refute me, with all your skill, and you are at a loss how to deal with the argument; while if I was mistaken, you are in the wrong there, too, for you assert that there is no such thing as making a mistake;
and what I say is not aimed at what you said last year.
But it seems, I went on, Dionysodorus and Euthydemus, that our argument remains just where it was, and still suffers from the old trouble of knocking others down and then falling itself, and even your art has not yet discovered a way of avoiding this failure in spite, too, of the wonderful show it makes of accurate reasoning.
Here Ctesippus exclaimed: Yes, your way of discussion is marvellous, you men of Thurii or Chios or wherever or however it is you are pleased to get your names; for you have no scruple about babbling like fools.
At this I was afraid we might hear some abuse, so I soothed Ctesippus down once more, saying: Ctesippus, I repeat to you what I said to Cleinias just now, that you do not perceive the wonderful nature of our visitors' skill.
Only they are unwilling to give us a display of it in real earnest, but treat us to jugglers' tricks in the style of Proteus the Egyptian adept.
So let us take our cue from Menelaus, and not leave hold of these gentlemen till they give us a sight of their own serious business.
I believe something very fine will be found in them as soon as they begin to be serious.
Come, let us beg and exhort and beseech them to let their light shine.
For my part, then, I am minded to take the lead once more in showing what sort of persons I pray may be revealed in them: starting from where I left off before, I shall try, as best I can, to describe what follows on from that, to see if I can rouse them to action and make them, in merciful commensuration of my earnest endeavor, be earnest themselves.
Will you, Cleinias, I asked, please remind me of the point at which we left off?
Now, as far as I can tell, it was something like this:
we ended by agreeing that one ought to pursue wisdom, did we not?
Yes, he said.
And this pursuit called philosophy is an acquiring of knowledge.
Is it not so?
I asked.
Yes, he said.
Then what knowledge should we acquire if we acquired it rightly?
Is it not absolutely clear that it must be that knowledge which will profit us?
Certainly, he said.
Now will it profit us at all, if we know how to tell, as we go about, where the earth has most gold buried in it?
Perhaps, he said.
But yet, I went on, we refuted that former proposition, agreeing that even if without any trouble or digging the earth we got all the gold in the world, we should gain nothing, so that not if we knew how to turn the rocks into gold would our knowledge be of any worth.
For unless we know how to use the gold, we found no advantage in it.
Do you not remember?
I asked.
Certainly I do, he said.
Nor, it seems, do we get any advantage from all other knowledge, whether of money-making or medicine or any other that knows how to make things, without knowing how to use the thing made.
Is it not so?
He agreed.
Nor again, if there is a knowledge enabling one to make men immortal, does this, if we lack the knowledge how to use immortality, seem to bring any advantage either, if we are to infer anything from our previous admissions.
On all these points we agreed.
Then the sort of knowledge we require, fair youth, I said, is that in which there happens to be a union of making and knowing how to use the thing made.
Apparently, he said.
So we ought, it seems, to aim at something far other than being lyre-makers or possessing that kind of knowledge.
For in this case the art that makes and the art that uses are quite distinct, dealing in separation with the same thing; since there is a wide difference between the art of making lyres and that of harp-playing.
Is it not so?
He agreed.
Nor again, obviously, do we require an art of flute-making; for this is another of the same kind.
He assented.
Now in good earnest, I asked, if we were to learn the art of speech-making, can that be the art we should acquire if we would be happy?
I for one think not, said Cleinias, interposing.
On what proof do you rely? I asked.
I see, he said, certain speech-writers who do not know how to use the special arguments composed by themselves, just as lyre-makers in regard to their lyres: in the former case also there are other persons able to use what the makers produced, while being themselves unable to make the written speech.
Hence it is clear that in speech likewise there are two distinct arts, one of making and one of using.
I think you give sufficient proof, I said, that this art of the speech-writers cannot be that whose acquisition would make one happy.
And yet I fancied that somewhere about this point would appear the knowledge which we have been seeking all this while.
For not only do these speech-writers themselves, when I am in their company, impress me as prodigiously clever, Cleinias, but their art itself seems so exalted as to be almost inspired.
However, this is not surprising; for it is a part of the sorcerer's art, and only slightly inferior to that.
The sorcerer's art is the charming of snakes and tarantulas and scorpions and other beasts and diseases, while the other is just the charming and soothing of juries, assemblies, crowds, and so forth.
Or does it strike you differently? I asked.
No, it appears to me, he replied, to be as you say.
Which way then, said I, shall we turn now?
What kind of art shall we try?
For my part, he said, I have no suggestion.
Why, I think I have found it myself, I said.
What is it?
said Cleinias.
Generalship, I replied, strikes me as the art whose acquisition above all others would make one happy.
I do not think so.
Why not?
I asked.
In a sense, this is an art of hunting men.
What then?
I said.
No part of actual hunting, he replied, covers more than the province of chasing and overcoming; and when they have overcome the creature they are chasing, they are unable to use it: the huntsmen or the fishermen hand it over to the caterers, and so it is too with the geometers, astronomers, and calculators for these also are hunters in their way, since they are not in each case diagram-makers, but discover the realities of things and so, not knowing how to use their prey, but only how to hunt, I take it they hand over their discoveries to the dialecticians to use properly, those of them, at least, who are not utter blockheads.
Very good, I said, most handsome and ingenious Cleinias; and is this really so?
To be sure it is;
and so, in the same way, with the generals, he said.
When they have hunted either a city or an army, they hand it over to the politicians since they themselves do not know how to use what they have hunted just as quail-hunters, I suppose, hand over their birds to the quail-keepers.
If, therefore, he went on, we are looking for that art which itself shall know how to use what it has acquired either in making or chasing, and if this is the sort that will make us blest, we must reject generalship, he said, and seek out some other.
Crito
What is this, Socrates?
Such a pronouncement from that stripling!
Socrates
You do not believe it is his, Crito?
Crito
I should rather think not.
For I am sure, if he spoke thus, he has no need of education from Euthydemus or anyone else.
Socrates
But then, Heaven help me!
I wonder if it was Ctesippus who said it, and my memory fails me.
Crito
Very like Ctesippus!
Socrates
Well, of this at any rate I am certain, that it was neither Euthydemus nor Dionysodorus who said it.
Tell me, mysterious Crito, was it some superior power that was there to speak it?
For that speech I heard, I am sure.
Crito
Yes, I promise you, Socrates: I fancy it was indeed some superior power very much so.
But after that, did you go on looking for a suitable art?
Did you find the one which you had as the object of your search, or not?
Socrates
Find it, my good fellow!
No, we were in a most ridiculous state; like children who run after crested larks, we kept on believing each moment we were just going to catch this or that one of the knowledges, while they as often slipped from our grasp.
What need to tell you the story at length?
When we reached the kingly art, and were examining it to see if we had here what provides and produces happiness, at this point we were involved in a labyrinth: when we supposed we had arrived at the end, we twisted about again and found ourselves practically at the beginning of our search, and just as sorely in want as when we first started on it.
Crito
How did this happen to you, Socrates?
Socrates
I will tell you.
We took the view that the statesman's and the monarch's arts were one and the same.
Crito
Well, what then?
Socrates
To this art, we thought, generalship and the other arts handed over the management of the productions of their own trades, as this one alone knew how to use them.
So it seemed clear to us that this was the one we were seeking, and was the cause of right conduct in the state, and precisely as Aeschylus' line expresses it, is seated alone at the helm of the city, steering the whole, commanding the whole, and making the whole useful.
Crito
And surely your notion was a good one, Socrates?
Socrates
You shall judge of that, Crito, if you care to hear what befell us thereafter.
For later on we reconsidered it somewhat in this manner: Look now, does the monarch's art, that rules over all, produce any effect or not?
Certainly it does, of course, we said to one another.
Would you not say so too, Crito?
Crito
I would.
Socrates
Then what would you say is its effect?
For instance, if I were to ask you whether medicine, in ruling over all that comes under its rule, has any effect to show;
would you not say: Yes, health?
Crito
I would.
Socrates
And what about your art of agriculture?
In ruling over all that comes under its rule, what effect does it produce?
Would you not say that it supplies us with food from the earth?
Crito
I would.
Socrates
And what of the monarch's art?
In ruling over all that comes under its rule, what does it produce?
Perhaps you are not quite ready with the answer.
Crito
I am not indeed, Socrates.
Socrates
Nor were we, Crito; yet so much you know, that if this is really the one we are seeking, it must be beneficial.
Crito
Certainly.
Socrates
Then surely it must purvey something good?
Crito
Necessarily, Socrates.
Socrates
And you know we agreed with each other, Cleinias and I, that nothing can be good but some sort of knowledge.
Crito
Yes, so you told me.
Socrates
And it was found that all effects in general that you may ascribe to statesmanship and a great many of them there must be, presumably, if the citizens are to be made wealthy and free and immune from faction all these things were neither bad nor good, while this art must make us wise and impart knowledge, if it really was to be the one which benefited us and made us happy.
Crito
True: so at all events you agreed then, by your account of the discussion.
Socrates
Then do you think that kingship makes men wise and good?
Crito
Why not, Socrates?
Socrates
But does it make all men good, and in all things?
And is this the art that confers every sort of knowledge shoe-making and carpentry and so forth?
Crito
No, I think not, Socrates.
Socrates
Well, what knowledge does it give ?
What use can we make of it?
It is not to be a producer of any of the effects which are neither bad nor good, while it is to confer no other knowledge but itself.
Shall we try and say what it is, and what use we shall make of it?
Do you mind if we describe it, Crito, as that whereby we shall make other men good?
Crito
I quite agree.
Socrates
And in what respect are we going to have these men good, and in what useful?
Or shall we venture to say they are to make others so, and these again others?
In what respect they can possibly be good is nowhere evident to us, since we have discredited all the business commonly called politics, and it is merely a case of the proverbial "Corinthus Divine"; and, as I was saying, we are equally or even worse at fault as to what that knowledge can be which is to make us happy.
Crito
Upon my word, Socrates, you got yourselves there, it seems, into a pretty fix.
Socrates
So then I myself, Crito, finding I had fallen into this perplexity, began to exclaim at the top of my voice, beseeching the two strangers as though I were calling upon the Heavenly Twins to save us, the lad and myself, from the mighty wave of the argument, and to give us the best of their efforts, and this done, to make plain to us what that knowledge can be of which we must get hold if we are to spend the remainder of our lives in a proper way
Crito
Well, did Euthydemus consent to propound anything for you?
Socrates
Why, certainly;
and he began his discourse, my good friend, in this very lofty-minded fashion:
Would you rather, Socrates, that I instructed you as to this knowledge which has baffled you all this while, or propound that you have it? he said.
gifted sir, I exclaimed, and have you the power to do this?
Certainly I have, he replied.
Then for Heaven's sake, I cried, propound that I have it!
This will be much easier than learning foraman of my age.
Come then, answer me this, he said: Do you know anything?
Yes, indeed, I replied, and many things, though trifles.
That is enough, he said;
now do you think it possible that anything that is should not be just that which it actually is?
On my soul, not I.
Now you, he said, know something?
I do.
Then you are knowing, if you really know?
Certainly, in just that something.
That makes no difference; you are not under a necessity of knowing everything, if you are knowing?
No, to be sure, I replied; for there are many other things which I do not know.
Then if you do not know something, you are not knowing?
Not in that thing, my dear sir, I replied.
Are you therefore any the less unknowing?
Just now you said you were knowing; so here you are, actually the very man that you are, and again, not that man, in regard to the same matter and at the same time!
Admitted, Euthydemus, I said: as the saying goes, "well said whate'er you say."
How therefore do I know that knowledge which we were seeking?
Since forsooth it is impossible for the same thing to be so and not be so; by knowing one thing I know all; for I could not be at once both knowing and unknowing; and as I know everything I have that knowledge to boot: is that your line of argument?
Is this your wisdom?
Yes, you see, Socrates, he said, your own words refute you.
Well, but, Euthydemus, I continued, are you not in the same plight?
I assure you, so long as I had you and this dear fellow Dionysodorus to share my lot, however hard, I should have nothing to complain of.
Tell me, you both know some existent things, of course, and others you do not?
By no means, Socrates, said Dionysodorus.
How do you mean?
I asked: do you then not know anything?
Oh yes, we do, he said.
So you know everything, I asked, since you know anything?
Everything, he replied; yes, and you too, if you know one thing, know all.
Good Heavens, I cried,
And the rest of mankind, do they know everything or nothing?
Surely, he said, they cannot know some things and not others, and so be at once knowing and unknowing.
But what then?
I asked.
All men, he replied, know all things, if they know one.
In the name of the god, Dionysodorus, I said
for now I can see both of you are serious; before, I could hardly prevail on you to be so do you yourselves really know everything?
Carpentry, for instance, and shoe-making?
Certainly, he said.
And you are good hands at leather-stitching?
Why yes, in faith, and cobbling, he said.
And are you good also at such things as counting the stars, and the sand?
Certainly, he said: can you think we would not admit that also?
Here Ctesippus broke in: Be so good, Dionysodorus, he said, as to place some such evidence before me as will convince me that what you say is true.
What shall I put forward?
he asked.
Do you know how many teeth Euthydemus has, and does Euthydemus know how many you have?
Are you not content, he rejoined, to be told that we know everything?
No, do not say that, he replied: only tell us this one thing more, and propound to us that you speak the truth.
Then, if you tell us how many teeth each of you has, and you are found by our counting to have known it, we shall believe you thenceforth in everything else likewise.
Well, as they supposed we were making fun of them, they would not do it: only they agreed that they knew all subjects, when questioned on them, one after the other, by Ctesippus; who, before he had done with them, asked them if they knew every kind of thing, even the most unseemly, without the least reserve; while they most valiantly encountered his questions, agreeing that they had the knowledge in each case, like boars when driven up to face the spears: so that I for my part, Crito, became quite incredulous,and had to ask in the end if Dionysodorus knew also how to dance.
To which he replied: Certainly.
I do not suppose, I said, that you have attained such a degree of skill as to do sword-dancing, or be whirled about on a wheel, at your time of life?
There is nothing, he said, that I cannot do.
Then tell me, I went on, do you know everything at present only, or for ever?
For ever too, he said.
And when you were children, and were just born, you knew?
Everything, they both replied together.
Now, to us the thing seemed incredible: then Euthydemus said: You do not believe it, Socrates?
I will only say, I replied, that you must indeed be clever.
Why, he said, if you will consent to answer me, I will propound that you too admit these surprising facts.
Oh, I am only too glad, I replied, to be refuted in the matter.
For if I am not aware of my own cleverness, and you are going to show me that I know everything always, what greater stroke of luck than this could befall me in all my living days?
Then answer me, he said.
Ask: I am ready to answer.
Well then, Socrates, he asked, have you knowledge of something, or not?
I have.
And tell me, do you know with that whereby you have knowledge, or with something else?
With that whereby I have knowledge:
I think you mean the soul, or is not that your meaning?
Are you not ashamed, Socrates, he said,
to ask a question on your side when you are being questioned?
Very well, I said: but how am I to proceed?
I will do just as you bid me.
When I cannot tell what you are asking, is it your order that I answer all the same, without asking a question upon it?
Why, he replied, you surely conceive some meaning in what I say?
I do, I replied.
Answer then to the meaning you conceive to be in my words.
Well, I said, if you ask a question with a different meaning in your mind from that which I conceive, and I answer to the latter, are you content I should answer nothing to the point?
For my part, he replied, I shall be content: you, however, will not, so far as I can see.
Then I declare I shall not answer, I said, before I get it right.
You refuse to answer, he said, to the meaning you conceive in each case, because you will go on driveling, you hopeless old dotard!
Here I perceived he was annoyed with me for distinguishing between the phrases used, when he wanted to entrap me in his verbal snares.
So I remembered Connus, how he too is annoyed with me whenever I do not give in to him, with the result that he now takes less trouble over me as being a stupid person.
So being minded to take lessons from this new teacher, I decided that I had better give in, lest he should take me for a blockhead and not admit me to his classes.
So I said: Well, if you think fit, Euthydemus, to proceed thus, we must do so; in any case I suppose you understand debating better than I do you are versed in the method, and I am but a layman.
Begin your questions, then, over again.
Now, answer me once more, he said: do you know what you know by means of something, or not?
I do, I replied; by means of my soul.
There he is again, he said, answering more than he is asked.
For I am not asking what the means is, but only whether you know by some means.
Yes, I did again answer more than I ought, I said, through lack of education.
But forgive me, and I will now simply reply that I know what I know by some means.
By one and the same means always, he asked, or sometimes by one and sometimes by another?
Always, whenever I know, I replied, it is by this means.
There again, he cried, you really must stop adding these qualifications.
But I am so afraid this word "always" may bring us to grief.
Not us, he rejoined, but, if anyone, you.
Now answer: do you know by this means always?
Always, I, replied, since I must withdraw the "whenever."
Then you always know by this means: that being the case, do you know some things by this means of knowing, and some things by another means, or everything by this?
Everything by this, I replied; everything, that is, that I know.
There it comes again, he cried; the same qualification!
Well, I withdraw my "that is, that I know."
No, do not withdraw a single word, he said: I ask you for no concession.
Only answer me: could you know all things if you did not know everything?
It would be most surprising, I said.
Then he went on: You may therefore add on now whatever you please: for you admit that you know all things.
It seems I do, I replied, seeing that my "that I know" has no force, and I know everything.
Now you have also admitted that you know always by the means whereby you know, whenever you know or however you like to put it.
For you have admitted that you always know and, at the same time, everything.
Hence it is clear that even as a child you knew, both when you were being born and when you were being conceived: and before you yourself came into being or heaven and earth existed, you knew all things, since you always know.
Yes, and I declare, he said, you yourself will always know all things, if it be my pleasure.
Oh, pray let it be your pleasure, I replied, most worshipful Euthydemus, if what you say is really true.
Only I do not quite trust in your efficacy, if your pleasure is not to he also that of your brother here, Dionysodorus: if it is, you will probably prevail.
And tell me, I went on, since I cannot hope in a general way to dispute the statement that I know everything with persons so prodigiously clever since it is your statement how am I to say I know certain things, Euthydemus; for instance, that good men are unjust?
Come, tell me, do I know this or not?
You know it certainly, he said.
What?
I said.
That the good are not unjust.
Quite so, I said: I knew that all the time;
but that is not what I ask: tell me, where did I learn that the good are unjust?
Nowhere, said Dionysodorus.
Then I do not know this, I said.
You are spoiling the argument, said Euthydemus to Dionysodorus, and we shall find that this fellow does not know, and is at once both knowing and unknowing.
At this Dionysodorus reddened.
But you, I said, what do you mean, Euthydemus.
Do you find that your brother, who knows everything, has not spoken aright?
I a brother of Euthydemus?
quickly interposed Dionysodorus.
Whereupon I said: Let me alone, good sir, till Euthydemus has taught me that I know that good men are unjust, and do not grudge me this lesson.
You are running away, Socrates, said Dionysodorus; you refuse to answer.
Yes, and with good reason, I said: for I am weaker than either one of you, so I have no scruple about running away from the two together.
You see, I am sadly inferior to Hercules, who was no match for the hydra that she-professor who was so clever that she sent forth many heads of debate in place of each one that was cut off; nor for another sort of, crab-professor from the sea freshly, I fancy, arrived on shore; and, when the hero was so bothered with its leftward barks and bites, he summoned his nephew Iolaus to the rescue, and he brought him effective relief.
But if my Iolaus were to come, he would do more harm than good.
Well, answer this, said Dionysodorus, now you have done your descanting: Was Iolaus more Hercules' nephew than yours?
I see I had best answer you, Dionysodorus, I said.
For you will never cease putting questions I think I may say I am sure of this in a grudging, obstructing spirit, so that Euthydemus may not teach me that bit of cleverness.
Then answer, he said.
Well, I answer, I said, that Iolaus was Hercules' nephew, but not mine, so far as I can see, in any way whatever.
For Patrocles, my brother, was not his father; only Hercules' brother Iphicles had a name somewhat similar to his.
And Patrocles, he said, is your brother?
Certainly, I said: that is, by the same mother, but not by the same father.
Then he is your brother and not your brother.
Not by the same father, worthy sir, I replied.
His father was Chaeredemus, mine Sophroniscus.
So Sophroniscus and Chaeredemus, he said, were "father"?
Certainly, I said: the former mine, the latter his.
Then surely, he went on, Chaeredemus was other than "father"?
Than mine, at any rate, I said.
Why then, he was father while being other than father.
Or are you the same as "the stone"?
I fear you may prove that of me, I said, though I do not feel like it.
Then are you other than the stone?
Other, I must say.
Then of course, he went on, if you are other than stone, you are not stone?
And if you are other than gold, you are not gold?
Quite so.
Hence Chaeredemus, he said, being other than father, cannot be "father."
It seems, I said, that he is not a father.
No, for I presume, interposed Euthydemus, that if Chaeredemus is a father Sophroniscus in his turn, being other than a father, is not a father; so that you, Socrates, are fatherless.
Here Ctesippus took it up, observing: And your father too, is he not in just the same plight?
Is he other than my father?
Not in the slightest, said Euthydemus.
What, asked the other, is he the same?
The same, to be sure.
I should not like to think he was:
but tell me, Euthydemus, is he my father only, or everybody else's too?
Everybody else's too, he replied; or do you suppose that the same man, being a father, can be no father?
I did suppose so, said Ctesippus.
Well, said the other, and that a thing being gold could be not gold?
Or being a man, not man?
Perhaps, Euthydemus, said Ctesippus, you are knotting flax with cotton, as they say: for it is a strange result that you state, if your father is father of all.
He is, though, was the reply.
Of all men, do you mean?
asked Ctesippus, or of horses too, and all other animals?
Of all, he said.
And is your mother a mother in the same way?
My mother too.
And is your mother a mother of sea-urchins?
Yes, and yours is also, he replied.
So then you are a brother of the gudgeons and whelps and porkers.
Yes, and so are you, he said.
Then your father is a boar and a dog.
And so is yours, he said.
Yes, said Dionysodorus, and it will take you but a moment, if you will answer me, Ctesippus, to acknowledge all this.
Just tell me, have you a dog?
Yes, a real rogue, said Ctesippus.
Has he got puppies?
Yes, a set of rogues like him.
Then is the dog their father?
Yes, indeed; I saw him with my own eyes covering the bitch.
Well now, is not the dog yours?
Certainly, he said.
Thus he is a father, and yours, and accordingly the dog turns out to be your father, and you a brother of whelps.
Hereupon Dionysodorus struck in again quickly, lest Ctesippus should get a word in before him: Answer me just one more little point: do you beat this dog?
Ctesippus laughed and said: My word, yes; since I cannot beat you!
So you beat your own father? he said.
There would be much more justice, though, he replied, in my beating yours, for being so ill-advised as to beget clever sons like you.
Yet I doubt, Ctesippus went on, if your father, Euthydemus the puppies' father has derived much good from this wisdom of yours.
Why, he has no need of much good, Ctesippus, neither he nor you.
And have you no need either, yourself, Euthydemus? he asked.
No, nor has any other man.
Just tell me, Ctesippus, whether you think it good for a sick man to drink physic when he wants it, or whether you consider it not good; or for a man to go to the wars with arms rather than without them.
With them, I think, he replied: and yet I believe you are about to utter one of your pleasantries.
You will gather that well enough, he said: only answer me.
Since you admit that physic is good for a man to drink when necessary, surely one ought to drink this good thing as much as possible; and in such a case it will be well to pound and infuse in it a cart-load of hellebore?
To this Ctesippus replied: Quite so, to be sure, Euthydemus, at any rate if the drinker is as big as the Delphian statue.
Then, further, since in war, he proceeded, it is good to have arms, one ought to have as many spears and shields as possible, if we agree that it is a good thing?
Yes, I suppose, said Ctesippus and you, Euthydemus, do you take the other view, that it should be one shield and one spear?
Yes, I do.
What, he said, and would you arm Geryon also and Briareus in this way?
I thought you more of an expert than that, considering you are a man-at-arms, and your comrade here too!
At this Euthydemus was silent; then Dionysodorus asked some questions on Ctesippus' previous answers, saying: Well now, gold is in your opinion a good thing to have?
Certainly, and here I agree plenty of it too, said Ctesippus.
Well then, do you not think it right to have good things always and everywhere?
Assuredly, he said.
Then do you admit that gold is also a good?
Why, I have admitted it, he replied.
Then we ought always to have it, and everywhere, and above all, in oneself?
And one will be happiest if one has three talents of gold in one's belly, a talent in one's skull, and a stater of gold in each eye?
Well, Euthydemus, replied Ctesippus, they say that among the Scythians those are the happiest and best men who have a lot of gold in their own skulls somewhat as you were saying a moment ago that "dog" is "father"; and a still more marvellous thing is told, how they drink out of their skulls when gilded, and gaze inside them, holding their own headpiece in their hands.
Tell me, said Euthydemus, do the Scythians and men in general see things possible of sight, or things impossible?
Possible, I presume.
And you do so too?
I too.
Then you see our cloaks?
Yes.
And have they power of sight?
Quite extraordinarily, said Ctesippus.
What do they see?
he asked.
Nothing.
Perhaps you do not think they see you are such a sweet innocent.
I should say, Euthydemus, that you have fallen asleep with your eyes open and, if it be possible to speak and at the same time say nothing, that this is what you are doing.
Why, asked Dionysodorus, may there not be a speaking of the silent?
By no means whatever, replied Ctesippus.
Nor a silence of speaking?
Still less, he said.
Now, when you speak of stones and timbers and irons, are you not speaking of the silent?
Not if I walk by a smithy, for there, as they say, the irons speak and cry aloud, when they are touched; so here your wisdom has seduced you into nonsense.
But come, you have still to propound me your second point, how on the other hand there may be a silence of speaking.
(It struck me that Ctesippus was specially excited on account of his young friend's presence.)
When you are silent, said Euthydemus, are you not making a silence of all things?
Yes, he replied.
Then it is a silence of speaking things also, if the speaking are among all things.
What, said Ctesippus, are not all things silent?
I presume not, said Euthydemus.
But then, my good sir, do all things speak?
Yes, I suppose, at least those that speak.
But that is not what I ask, he said: are all things silent or do they speak?
Neither and both, said Dionysodorus, snatching the word from him: I am quite sure that is an answer that will baffle you!
At this Ctesippus, as his manner was, gave a mighty guffaw, and said: Ah, Euthydemus, your brother has made the argument ambiguous with his "both," and is worsted and done for.
Then Cleinias was greatly delighted and laughed, so that Ctesippus felt his strength was as the strength of ten:
but I fancy Ctesippus he is such a rogue had picked up these very words by overhearing the men themselves, since in nobody else of the present age is such wisdom to be found.
So I remarked: Why are you laughing, Cleinias, at such serious and beautiful things?
What, have you, Socrates, ever yet seen a beautiful thing?
asked Dionysodorus.
Yes, I have, I replied, and many of them, Dionysodorus.
Did you find them different from the beautiful, he said, or the same as the beautiful?
Here I was desperately perplexed, and felt that I had my deserts for the grunt I had made: however, I replied that they were different from the beautiful itself, though each of them had some beauty present with it.
So if an ox is present with you, he said, you are an ox, and since I am now present with you, you are Dionysodorus.
Heavens, do not say that, I cried.
But in what way can one thing, by having a different thing present with it, be itself different?
Are you at a loss there?
I asked: already I was attempting to imitate the cleverness of these men, I was so eager to get it.
Can I help being at a loss, he said, I and likewise everybody else in the world, in face of what cannot be?
What is that you say, Dionysodorus?
I asked: is not the beautiful beautiful, and the ugly ugly?
Yes, if it seems so to me, he replied.
Then does it seem so?
Certainly, he said.
Then the same also is the same, and the different different?
For I presume the different cannot be the same; nay, I thought not even a child would doubt that the different is different.
But, Dionysodorus, you have deliberately passed over this one point; though, on the whole, I feel that, like craftsmen finishing off each his special piece of work, you two are carrying out your disputation in excellent style.
Well, he asked, do you know what is each craftsman's special piece of work?
First of all, whose proper task is it to forge brass? Can you tell?
I can: a brazier's.
Well, again, whose to make pots?
A potter's.
Once more, whose to slaughter and skin, and after cutting up the joints to stew and roast?
A caterer's, I said.
Now, if one does one's proper work, he said, one will do rightly?
Yes, to be sure.
And is it, as you say, the caterer's proper work to cut up and skin?
Did you admit this or not?
I did so, I replied, but pray forgive me.
It is clear then, he proceeded, that if someone slaughters the caterer and cuts him up, and then stews or roasts him, he will be doing his proper work; and if he hammers the brazier himself, and moulds the potter, he will be doing his business likewise.
Poseidon! I exclaimed, there you give the finishing touch to your wisdom.
I wonder if this skill could ever come to me in such manner as to be my very own.
Would you recognize it, Socrates, he asked, if it came to be your own?
Yes, if only you are agreeable, I replied, without a doubt.
Why, he went on, do you imagine you perceive what is yours?
Yes, if I take your meaning aright: for all my hopes arise from you, and end In Euthydemus here.
Then tell me, he asked, do you count those things yours which you control and are free to use as you please?
For instance, an ox or a sheep,would you count these as yours, if you were free to sell or bestow them, or sacrifice them to any god you chose?
And things which you could not treat thus are not yours?
Hereupon, since I knew that some brilliant result was sure to bob up from the mere turn of the questions, and as I also wanted to hear it as quickly as possible, I said: It is precisely as you say; only such things are mine.
Well now, he went on: you call those things animals which have life?
Yes, I said.
And you admit that only those animals are yours which you are at liberty to deal with in those various ways that I mentioned just now?
I admit that.
Then after a very ironical pause, as though he were pondering some great matter he proceeded: Tell me, Socrates, have you an ancestral Zeus?
Here I suspected the discussion was approaching the point at which it eventually ended, and so I tried what desperate wriggle I could to escape from the net in which I now felt myself entangled.
My answer was: I have not, Dionysodorus.
What a miserable fellow you must be, he said, and no Athenian at all, if you have neither ancestral gods, nor shrines, nor anything else that denotes a gentleman!
Enough, Dionysodorus; speak fair words, and don't browbeat your pupil!
For I have altars and shrines, domestic and ancestral, and everything else of the sort that other Athenians have.
Then have not other Athenians, he asked, their ancestral Zeus?
None of the Ionians, I replied, give him this title, neither we nor those who have left this city to settle abroad: they have an ancestral Apollo, because of Ion's parentage.
Among us the name "ancestral" is not given to Zeus, but that of "houseward" and "tribal," and we have a tribal Athena.
That will do, said Dionysodorus; you have, it seems, Apollo and Zeus and Athena.
Certainly, I said.
Then these must be your gods?
he said.
My ancestors, I said, and lords.
Well, at least, you have them, he said: or have you not admitted they are yours?
I have admitted it, I replied: what else could I do?
And are not these gods animals?
he asked: you know you have admitted that whatever has life is an animal.
Or have these gods no life?
They have, I replied.
Then are they not animals?
Yes, animals, I said.
And those animals, he went on, you have admitted to be yours, which you are free to bestow and sell and sacrifice to any god you please.
I have admitted it, I replied; there is no escape for me, Euthydemus.
Come then, tell me straight off, he said; since you admit that Zeus and the other gods are yours, are you free to sell or bestow them or treat them just as you please, like the other animals?
Well, Crito, here I must say I was knocked out, as it were, by the argument, and lay speechless; then Ctesippus rushed to the rescue and Bravo, Hercules!
he cried, a fine argument!
Whereat Dionysodorus asked: Now, do you mean that Hercules is a bravo, or that bravo is Hercules?
Ctesippus replied: Poseidon, what a frightful use of words!
I give up the fight: these two are invincible.
Hereupon I confess, my dear Crito, that everyone present without exception wildly applauded the argument and the two men, till they all nearly died of laughing and clapping and rejoicing.
For their previous successes had been highly acclaimed one by one, but only by the devotees of Euthydemus; whereas now almost the very pillars of the Lyceum took part in the joyful acclamations in honor of the pair.
For myself, I was quite disposed to admit that never had I set eyes on such clever people, and I was so utterly enthralled by their skill that I betook myself to praising and congratulating them, and said: Ah, happy pair!
What amazing genius, to acquire such a great accomplishment so quickly and in so short a time!
Among the many fine points in your arguments, Euthydemus and Dionysodorus, there is one that stands out in particular magnificence that you care not a jot for the multitude, or for any would-be important or famous people, but only for those of your own sort.
And I am perfectly sure that there are but a few persons like yourselves who would be satisfied with these arguments: the rest of the world regard them only as arguments with which, I assure you, they would feel it a greater disgrace to refute others than to be refuted themselves.
And further, there is at the same time a popular and kindly feature in your talk: when you say there is nothing either beautiful, or good, or white, and so on, and no difference of things at all, in truth you simply stitch up men's mouths, as you expressly say you do; while as to your apparent power of stitching up your own mouths as well, this is a piece of agreeable manners that takes off any offence from your talk.
But the greatest thing of all is, that this faculty of yours is such, and is so skilfully contrived, that anyone in the world may learn it of you in a very short time; this fact I perceived myself by watching Ctesippus and observing how quickly he was able to imitate you on the spot.
Now, in so far as your accomplishment can be quickly imparted, it is excellent; but for public discussions it is not suitable: if I may advise you, beware of talking before a number of people, lest they learn the whole thing in a trice and give you no credit for it.
The best thing for you is to talk to each other by yourselves, in private; failing that, if a third person is present, it must be someone who will pay you a good fee.
And if you are prudent you will give this same counsel to your pupils also that they are never to converse with anybody except you and each other.
For it is the rare, Euthydemus, that is precious, while water is cheapest, though best, as Pindar said.
But come, I said, see if you can admit both me and Cleinias here to your class.
This, Crito, was our conversation, and after exchanging a few more words we went off.
Now you must arrange to join us in taking lessons from the pair; for they say they are able to teach anyone who is willing to pay good money, and that no sort of character or age and it is well that you especially should be told that they promise that their art is no hindrance to money-making need deter anyone from an easy acquisition of their wisdom.
Crito
Indeed, Socrates, I love listening, and would be glad to learn from them; but I am afraid I am one of the sort who are not like Euthydemus, but who, as you described them just now, would prefer being refuted to refuting with such arguments.
Now, although I feel it is absurd to admonish you, I wish nevertheless to report to you what was told me just now.
Do you know, one of the people who had left your discussion came up to me as I was taking a stroll a man who thinks himself very wise, one of those who are so clever at turning out speeches for the law-courts and said: Crito, do you take no lessons from these wise men?
No, in truth, I replied: there was such a crowd that, though I stood quite close, I was unable to catch what was said.
Well, let me tell you, he said, it was something worth hearing.
What was it?
I asked.
You would have heard the disputation of men who are the most accomplished of our day in that kind of speaking.
To this I replied: Well, what did they show forth to you?
Merely the sort of stuff, he said, that you may hear such people babbling about at any time making an inconsequent ado about matters of no consequence
(in some such parlance he expressed himself).
Whereupon Well, all the same, I said, philosophy is a charming thing.
Charming is it, my dear innocent?
nay, a thing of no consequence.
Why, had you been in that company just now, you would have been filled with shame, I fancy, for your particular friend: he was so strangely willing to lend himself to persons who care not a straw what they say, but merely fasten on any phrase that turns up.
And these, as I said just now, are the heads of their profession today.
But the fact is, Crito, he went on, the business itself and the people who follow it are worthless and ridiculous.
Now, in my opinion, Socrates, lie was not right in decrying the pursuit: he is wrong, and so is anyone else who decries it: though I must say I felt he was right in blaming the readiness to engage in discussion with such people before a large company.
Socrates
Crito, these people are very odd.
But I do not yet know what answer I shall give you.
Of which party was he who came up to you and blamed philosophy?
Was he one of those who excel in the contests of the courts, an orator; or of those who equip the orators for the fray, a composer of the speeches they deliver in their contests?
Crito
Nothing of an orator, I dare swear, nor do I think he has ever appeared in court: only he is reputed to know about the business, so they declare, and to be a clever person, and compose clever speeches.
Socrates
Now I understand: it was of these people that I was just now going to speak myself.
They are the persons, Crito, whom Prodicus described as the border-ground between philosopher and politician, yet they fancy that they are the wisest of all mankind, and that they not merely are but are thought so by a great many people; and accordingly they feel that none but the followers of philosophy stand in the way of their universal renown.
Hence they believe that, if they can reduce the latter to a status of no esteem, the prize of victory will by common consent be awarded to them, without dispute or delay, and their claim to wisdom will be won.
For they consider themselves to be in very truth the wisest, but find that, when caught in private conversation, they are cut off short by Euthydemus and his set.
This conceit of their wisdom is very natural, since they regard themselves as moderately versed in philosophy, and moderately too in politics, on quite reasonable grounds: for they have dipped into both as far as they needed, and, evading all risk and struggle, are content to gather the fruits of wisdom.
Crito
Well, now, do you consider, Socrates, that there is anything in what they say?
It is not to be denied that these men have some color for their statements.
Socrates
Yes, that is so, Crito; color rather than truth.
It is no easy matter to persuade them that either people or things, which are between two other things and have a certain share of both, if compounded of bad and good are found to be better than the one and worse than the other;
but if compounded of two good things which have not the same object, they are worse than either of their components in relation to the object to which each of them is adapted; while if they are compounded of two bad things which have not the same object, and stand between them, this is the only case where they are better than either of the two things of which they have a share.
Now if philosophy and the statesman's business are both good things, and each of them has a different object, and if these persons, partaking of both, are between them, their claims are nought; for they are inferior to both: if one is good and the other bad, they are better than the one and worse than the other: while if both are bad, in this case there would be some truth in their statement, but in any other case there is none.
Now I do not think they will admit either that both these things are bad, or that one is bad and the other good: the truth is that these people, partaking of both, are inferior to both in respect of the objects for which statesmanship and philosophy are important; and while they are really in the third place they seek to be accorded the first.
However, we ought to be indulgent towards their ambition and not feel annoyed, while still judging them to be what they actually are.
For we should be glad of anyone, whoever he may be, who says anything that verges on good sense, and labours steadily and manfully in its pursuit.
Crito
Now I myself, Socrates, as I so often tell you, am in doubt about my sons, as to what I am to do with them.
The younger is as yet quite small; but Critobulus is already grown up, and needs someone who will be of service to him.
When I am in your company, the effect on me is such as to make me feel it is mere madness to have taken ever so much pains in various directions for the good of my children first in so marrying that they should be of very good blood on their mother's side; then in making money so that they might be as well off as possible; while I have neglected the training of the boys themselves.
But when I glance at one of the persons who profess to educate people, I am dismayed, and feel that each one of them, when I consider them, is wholly unsuitable to tell you the truth between ourselves.
So that I cannot see how I am to incline the lad towards philosophy.
Socrates
My dear Crito are you not aware that in every trade the duffers are many and worthless, whereas the good workers are few and worth any price?
Why, do you not hold athletics, and money-making, and rhetoric, and generalship, to be fine things?
Crito
Certainly I do, of course.
Socrates
Well then, in each of these, do you not see most men making a ridiculous show at their respective tasks?
Crito
Yes, I know: what you say is perfectly true.
Socrates
Then will you yourself on this account eschew all these pursuits, and not let your son have anything to do with them?
Crito
No, there would be no good reason for that, Socrates.
Socrates
Then avoid at least what is wrong, Crito: let those who practise philosophy have their way, whether they are helpful or mischievous; and when you have tested the matter itself, well and truly, if you find it to be a poor affair, turn everyone you can away from it, not only your sons: but if you find it to be such as I think it is, pursue and ply it without fear, both you, as they say, and yours.
Euthyphro
Euthyphro
Socrates
Euthyphro
What strange thing has happened, Socrates, that you have left your accustomed haunts in the Lyceum and are now haunting the portico where the king archon sits?
For it cannot be that you have an action before the king, as I have.
Socrates
Our Athenians, Euthyphro, do not call it an action, but an indictment.
Euthyphro
What?
Somebody has, it seems, brought an indictment against you; for I don't accuse you of having brought one against anyone else.
Socrates
Certainly not.
Euthyphro
But someone else against you?
Socrates
Quite so.
Euthyphro
Who is he?
Socrates
I don't know the man very well myself, Euthyphro, for he seems to be a young and unknown person.
His name, however, is Meletus, I believe.
And he is of the deme of Pitthus, if you remember any Pitthian Meletus, with long hair and only a little beard, but with a hooked nose.
Euthyphro
I don't remember him, Socrates.
But what sort of an indictment has he brought against you?
Socrates
What sort?
No mean one, it seems to me; for the fact that, young as he is, he has apprehended so important a matter reflects no small credit upon him.
For he says he knows how the youth are corrupted and who those are who corrupt them.
He must be a wise man; who, seeing my lack of wisdom and that I am corrupting his fellows, comes to the State, as a boy runs to his mother, to accuse me.
And he seems to me to be the only one of the public men who begins in the right way; for the right way is to take care of the young men first, to make them as good as possible, just as a good husbandman will naturally take care of the young plants first and afterwards of the rest.
And so Meletus, perhaps, is first clearing away us who corrupt the young plants, as he says; then after this, when he has turned his attention to the older men, he will bring countless most precious blessings upon the State, at least, that is the natural outcome of the beginning he has made.
Euthyphro
I hope it may be so, Socrates; but I fear the opposite may result.
For it seems to me that he begins by injuring the State at its very heart, when he undertakes to harm you.
Now tell me, what does he say you do that corrupts the young?
Socrates
Absurd things, my friend, at first hearing.
For he says I am a maker of gods; and because I make new gods and do not believe in the old ones, he indicted me for the sake of these old ones, as he says.
Euthyphro
I understand, Socrates; it is because you say the divine monitor keeps coming to you.
So he has brought the indictment against you for making innovations in religion, and he is going into court to slander you, knowing that slanders on such subjects are readily accepted by the people.
Why, they even laugh at me and say I am crazy when I say anything in the assembly about divine things and foretell the future to them.
And yet there is not one of the things I have foretold that is not true; but they are jealous of all such men as you and I are.
However, we must not be disturbed, but must come to close quarters with them.
Socrates
My dear Euthyphro, their ridicule is perhaps of no consequence.
For the Athenians, I fancy, are not much concerned, if they think a man is clever, provided he does not impart his clever notions to others; but when they think he makes others to be like himself, they are angry with him, either through jealousy, as you say, or for some other reason.
Euthyphro
I don't much desire to test their sentiments toward me in this matter.
Socrates
No, for perhaps they think that you are reserved and unwilling to impart your wisdom.
But I fear that because of my love of men they think that I not only pour myself out copiously to anyone and everyone without payment, but that I would even pay something myself, if anyone would listen to me.
Now if, as I was saying just now, they were to laugh at me, as you say they do at you, it would not be at all unpleasant to pass the time in the court with jests and laughter; but if they are in earnest, then only soothsayers like you can tell how this will end.
Euthyphro
Well, Socrates, perhaps it won't amount to much, and you will bring your case to a satisfactory ending, as I think I shall mine.
Socrates
What is your case, Euthyphro?
Are you defending or prosecuting?
Euthyphro
Prosecuting.
Socrates
Whom?
Euthyphro
Such a man that they think I am insane because I am prosecuting him.
Socrates
Why?
Are you prosecuting one who has wings to fly away with?
Euthyphro
No flying for him at his ripe old age.
Socrates
Who is he?
Euthyphro
My father.
Socrates
Your father, my dear man?
Euthyphro
Certainly.
Socrates
But what is the charge, and what is the suit about?
Euthyphro
Murder, Socrates.
Socrates
Heracles!
Surely, Euthyphro, most people do not know where the right lies; for I fancy it is not everyone who can rightly do what you are doing, but only one who is already very far advanced in wisdom.
Euthyphro
Very far, indeed, Socrates, by Zeus.
Socrates
Is the one who was killed by your father a relative?
But of course he was;
for you would not bring a charge of murder against him on a stranger's account.
Euthyphro
It is ridiculous, Socrates, that you think it matters whether the man who was killed was a stranger or a relative, and do not see that the only thing to consider is whether the action of the slayer was justified or not, and that if it was justified one ought to let him alone, and if not, one ought to proceed against him, even if he share one's hearth and eat at one's table.
For the pollution is the same if you associate knowingly with such a man and do not purify yourself and him by proceeding against him.
In this case, the man who was killed was a hired workman of mine, and when we were farming at Naxos, he was working there on our land.
Now he got drunk, got angry with one of our house slaves, and butchered him.
So my father bound him hand and foot, threw him into a ditch, and sent a man here to Athens to ask the religious adviser what he ought to do.
In the meantime he paid no attention to the man as he lay there bound, and neglected him, thinking that he was a murderer and it did not matter if he were to die.
And that is just what happened to him.
For he died of hunger and cold and his bonds before the messenger came back from the adviser.
Now my father and the rest of my relatives are angry with me, because for the sake of this murderer I am prosecuting my father for murder.
For they say he did not kill him, and if he had killed him never so much, yet since the dead man was a murderer, I ought not to trouble myself about such a fellow, because it is unholy for a son to prosecute his father for murder.
how little they know, Socrates, what the divine law is in regard to holiness and unholiness.
Socrates
But, in the name of Zeus, Euthyphro, do you think your knowledge about divine laws and holiness and unholiness is so exact that, when the facts are as you say, you are not afraid of doing something unholy yourself in prosecuting your father for murder?
Euthyphro
I should be of no use, Socrates, and Euthyphro would be in no way different from other men, if I did not have exact knowledge about all such things.
Socrates
Then the best thing for me, my admirable Euthyphro, is to become your pupil and, before the suit with Meletus comes on, to challenge him and say that I always thought it very important before to know about divine matters and that now, since he says I am doing wrong by acting carelessly and making innovations in matters of religion, I have become your pupil.
And "Meletus," I should say, "if you acknowledge that Euthyphro is wise in such matters, then believe that I also hold correct opinions, and do not bring me to trial; and if you do not acknowledge that, then bring a suit against him, my teacher, rather than against me, and charge him with corrupting the old, namely, his father and me, which he does by teaching me and by correcting and punishing his father."
And if he does not do as I ask and does not release me from the indictment or bring it against you in my stead, I could say in the court the same things I said in my challenge to him, could I not?
Euthyphro
By Zeus, Socrates, if he should undertake to indict me, I fancy I should find his weak spot, and it would be much more a question about him in court than about me.
Socrates
And I, my dear friend, perceiving this, wish to become your pupil; for I know that neither this fellow Meletus, nor anyone else, seems to notice you at all, but he has seen through me so sharply and so easily that he has indicted me for impiety.
Now in the name of Zeus, tell me what you just now asserted that you knew so well.
What do you say is the nature of piety and impiety, both in relation to murder and to other things?
Is not holiness always the same with itself in every action and, on the other hand, is not unholiness the opposite of all holiness, always the same with itself and whatever is to be unholy possessing some one characteristic quality?
Euthyphro
Certainly, Socrates.
Socrates
Tell me then, what do you say holiness is, and what unholiness?
Euthyphro
Well then, I say that holiness is doing what I am doing now, prosecuting the wrongdoer who commits murder or steals from the temples or does any such thing, whether he be your father, or your mother or anyone else, and not prosecuting him is unholy.
And, Socrates, see what a sure proof I offer you, a proof I have already given to others, that this is established and right and that we ought not to let him who acts impiously go unpunished, no matter who he may be.
Men believe that Zeus is the best and most just of the gods, and they acknowledge that he put his father in bonds because he wickedly devoured his children, and he in turn had mutilated his father for similar reasons; but they are incensed against me because I proceed against my father when he has done wrong, and so they are inconsistent in what they say about the gods and about me.
Socrates
Is not this, Euthyphro, the reason why I am being prosecuted, because when people tell such stories about the gods I find it hard to accept them?
And therefore, probably, people will say I am wrong.
Now if you, who know so much about such things, accept these tales, I suppose I too must give way.
For what am I to say, who confess frankly that I know nothing about them?
But tell me, in the name of Zeus, the god of friendship, do you really believe these things happened?
Euthyphro
Yes, and still more wonderful things than these, Socrates, which most people do not know.
Socrates
And so you believe that there was really war between the gods, and fearful enmities and battles and other things of the sort, such as are told of by the poets and represented in varied designs by the great artists in our sacred places and especially on the robe which is carried up to the Acropolis at the great Panathenaea?
Shall we agree that these things are true, Euthyphro?
Euthyphro
Not only these things, Socrates; but, as I said just now, I will, if you like, tell you many other things about the gods, which I am sure will amaze you when you hear them.
Socrates
I dare say.
But you can tell me those things at your leisure some other time.
At present try to tell more clearly what I asked you just now.
For, my friend, you did not give me sufficient information before, when I asked what holiness was, but you told me that this was holy which you are now doing, prosecuting your father for murder.
Euthyphro
Well, what I said was true, Socrates.
Socrates
Perhaps.
But, Euthyphro, you say that many other things are holy, do you not?
Euthyphro
Why, so they are.
Socrates
Now call to mind that this is not what I asked you, to tell me one or two of the many holy acts, but to tell the essential aspect, by which all holy acts are holy;
for you said that all unholy acts were unholy and all holy ones holy by one aspect.
Or don't you remember?
Euthyphro
I remember.
Socrates
Tell me then what this aspect is, that I may keep my eye fixed upon it and employ it as a model and, if anything you or anyone else does agrees with it, may say that the act is holy, and if not, that it is unholy.
Euthyphro
If you wish me to explain in that way, I will do so.
Socrates
I do wish it.
Euthyphro
Well then, what is dear to the gods is holy, and what is not dear to them is unholy.
Socrates
Excellent, Euthyphro, now you have answered as I asked you to answer.
However, whether it is true, I am not yet sure; but you will, of course, show that what you say is true.
Euthyphro
Certainly.
Socrates
Come then, let us examine our words.
The thing and the person that are dear to the gods are holy, and the thing and the person that are hateful to the gods are unholy; and the two are not the same, but the holy and the unholy are the exact opposites of each other.
Is not this what we have said?
Euthyphro
Yes, just this.
Socrates
And it seems to be correct?
Euthyphro
I think so, Socrates.
Socrates
Well then, have we said this also, that the gods, Euthyphro, quarrel and disagree with each other, and that there is enmity between them?
Euthyphro
Yes, we have said that.
Socrates
But what things is the disagreement about, which causes enmity and anger?
Let us look at it in this way.
If you and I were to disagree about number, for instance, which of two numbers were the greater, would the disagreement about these matters make us enemies and make us angry with each other, or should we not quickly settle it by resorting to arithmetic?
Euthyphro
Of course we should.
Socrates
Then, too, if we were to disagree about the relative size of things, we should quickly put an end to the disagreement by measuring?
Euthyphro
Yes.
Socrates
And we should, I suppose, come to terms about relative weights by weighing?
Euthyphro
Of course.
Socrates
But about what would a disagreement be, which we could not settle and which would cause us to be enemies and be angry with each other?
Perhaps you cannot give an answer offhand; but let me suggest it.
Is it not about right and wrong, and noble and disgraceful, and good and bad?
Are not these the questions about which you and I and other people become enemies, when we do become enemies, because we differ about them and cannot reach any satisfactory agreement?
Euthyphro
Yes, Socrates, these are the questions about which we should become enemies.
Socrates
And how about the gods, Euthrphro?
If they disagree, would they not disagree about these questions?
Euthyphro
Necessarily.
Socrates
Then, my noble Euthyphro, according to what you say, some of the gods too think some things are right or wrong and noble or disgraceful, and good or bad, and others disagree; for they would not quarrel with each other if they did not disagree about these matters.
Is that the case?
Euthyphro
You are right.
Socrates
Then the gods in each group love the things which they consider good and right and hate the opposites of these things?
Euthyphro
Certainly.
Socrates
But you say that the same things are considered right by some of them and wrong by others; and it is because they disagree about these things that they quarrel and wage war with each other.
Is not this what you said?
Euthyphro
It is.
Socrates
Then, as it seems, the same things are hated and loved by the gods, and the same things would be dear and hateful to the gods.
Euthyphro
So it seems.
Socrates
And then the same things would be both holy and unholy, Euthyphro, according to this statement.
Euthyphro
I suppose so.
Socrates
Then you did not answer my question, my friend.
For I did not ask you what is at once holy and unholy; but, judging from your reply, what is dear to the gods is also hateful to the gods.
And so, Euthyphro, it would not be surprising if, in punishing your father as you are doing, you were performing an act that is pleasing to Zeus, but hateful to Cronus and Uranus, and pleasing to Hephaestus, but hateful to Hera, and so forth in respect to the other gods, if any disagree with any other about it.
Euthyphro
But I think, Socrates, that none of the gods disagrees with any other about this, or holds that he who kills anyone wrongfully ought not to pay the penalty.
Socrates
Well, Euthyphro, to return to men, did you ever hear anybody arguing that he who had killed anyone wrongfully, or had done anything else whatever wrongfully, ought not to pay the penalty?
Euthyphro
Why, they are always arguing these points, especially in the law courts.
For they do very many wrong things; and then there is nothing they will not do or say, in defending themselves, to avoid the penalty.
Socrates
Yes, but do they acknowledge, Euthyphro, that they have done wrong and, although they acknowledge it, nevertheless say that they ought not to pay the penalty?
Euthyphro
Oh, no, they don't do that.
Socrates
Then there is something they do not do and say.
For they do not, I fancy, dare to say and argue that, if they have really done wrong, they ought not to pay the penalty; but, I think, they say they have not done wrong; do they not?
Euthyphro
You are right.
Socrates
Then they do not argue this point, that the wrongdoer must not pay the penalty; but perhaps they argue about this, who is a wrongdoer, and what he did, and when.
Euthyphro
That is true.
Socrates
Then is not the same thing true of the gods, if they quarrel about right and wrong, as you say, and some say others have done wrong, and some say they have not?
For surely, my friend, no one, either of gods or men, has the face to say that he who does wrong ought not to pay the penalty.
Euthyphro
Yes, you are right about this, Socrates, in the main.
Socrates
But I think, Euthyphro, those who dispute, both men and gods, if the gods do dispute, dispute about each separate act.
When they differ with one another about any act, some say it was right and others that it was wrong.
Is it not so?
Euthyphro
Certainly.
Socrates
Come now, my dear Euthyphro, inform me, that I may be made wiser, what proof you have that all the gods think that the man lost his life wrongfully, who, when he was a servant, committed murder, was bound by the master of the man he killed, and died as a result of his bonds before the master who had bound him found out from the advisers what he ought to do with him, and that it is right on account of such a man for a son to proceed against his father and accuse him of murder.
Come, try to show me clearly about this, that the gods surely believe that this conduct is right; and if you show it to my satisfaction, I will glorify your wisdom as long as I live.
Euthyphro
But perhaps this is no small task, Socrates; though I could show you quite clearly.
Socrates
I understand; it is because you think I am slower to understand than the judges; since it is plain that you will show them that such acts are wrong and that all the gods hate them.
Euthyphro
Quite clearly, Socrates; that is, if they listen to me.
Socrates
They will listen, if they find that you are a good speaker.
But this occurred to me while you were talking, and I said to myself: "If Euthyphro should prove to me no matter how clearly that all the gods think such a death is wrongful, what have I learned from Euthyphro about the question, what is holiness and what is unholiness?
For this act would, as it seems, be hateful to the gods; but we saw just now that holiness and its opposite are not defined in this way; for we saw that what is hateful to the gods is also dear to them; and so I let you off any discussion of this point, Euthyphro.
If you like, all the gods may think it wrong and may hate it.
But shall we now emend our definition and say that whatever all the gods hate is unholy and whatever they all love is holy, and what some love and others hate is neither or both?
Do you wish this now to be our definition of holiness and unholiness?
Euthyphro
What is to hinder, Socrates?
Socrates
Nothing, so far as I am concerned, Euthyphro, but consider your own position, whether by adopting this definition you will most easily teach me what you promised.
Euthyphro
Well, I should say that what all the gods love is holy and, on the other hand, what they all hate is unholy.
Socrates
Then shall we examine this again, Euthyphro, to see if it is correct, or shall we let it go and accept our own statement, and those of others, agreeing that it is so, if anyone merely says that it is?
Or ought we to inquire into the correctness of the statement?
Euthyphro
We ought to inquire.
However, I think this is now correct.
Socrates
We shall soon know more about this, my friend.
Just consider this question: Is that which is holy loved by the gods because it is holy, or is it holy because it is loved by the gods?
Euthyphro
I don't know what you mean, Socrates.
Socrates
Then I will try to speak more clearly.
We speak of being carried and of carrying, of being led and of leading, of being seen and of seeing; and you understand do you not? that in all such expressions the two parts differ one from the other in meaning, and how they differ.
Euthyphro
I think I understand.
Socrates
Then, too, we conceive of a thing being loved and of a thing loving, and the two are different?
Euthyphro
No, for that reason.
Socrates
And a thing which is led is led because one leads it, and a thing which is seen is so because one sees it?
Euthyphro
Certainly.
Socrates
Then one does not see it because its a seen thing, but, on the contrary, it is a seen thing because one sees it; and one does not lead it because it is a led thing, but it is a led thing because one leads it; and one does not carry it because it is a carried thing, but it is a carried thing because one carries it.
Is it clear, Euthyphro, what I am trying to say?
I am trying to say this, that if anything becomes or undergoes, it does not become because it is in a state of becoming, but it is in a state of becoming because it becomes, and it does not undergo because it is a thing which undergoes, but because it undergoes it is a thing which undergoes; or do you not agree to this?
Euthyphro
I agree.
Socrates
Is not that which is beloved a thing which is either becoming or undergoing something?
Euthyphro
Certainly.
Socrates
And is this case like the former ones: those who love it do not love it because it is a bad thing, but it is a beloved thing because they love it?
Euthyphro
Obviously.
Socrates
Now what do you say about that which is holy,
It is loved by all the gods, is it not, according to what you said?
Euthyphro
Yes.
Socrates
For this reason, because it is holy, or for some other reason?
Euthyphro
No, for this reason.
Socrates
It is loved because it is holy, not holy because it is loved?
Euthyphro
I think so.
Socrates
But that which is dear to the gods is dear to them and beloved by them because they love it.
Euthyphro
Of course.
Socrates
Then that which is dear to the gods and that which is holy are not identical, but differ one from the other.
Euthyphro
How so, Socrates?
Socrates
Because we are agreed that the holy is loved because it is holy and that it is not holy because it is loved; are we not?
Euthyphro
Yes.
Socrates
But we are agreed that what is dear to the gods is dear to them because they love it, that is, by reason of this love, not that they love it because it is dear.
Euthyphro
Very true.
Socrates
But if that which is dear to the gods and that which is holy were identical, my dear Euthyphro, then if the holy were loved because it is holy, that which is dear to the gods would be loved because it is dear, and if that which is dear to the gods is dear because it is loved, then that which is holy would be holy because it is loved; but now you see that the opposite is the case, showing that the two are different from each other.
For the one becomes lovable from the fact that it is loved, whereas the other is loved because it is in itself lovable.
And, Euthyphro, it seems that when you were asked what holiness is you were unwilling to make plain its essence, but you mentioned something that has happened to this holiness, namely, that it is loved by the gods.
But you did not tell as yet what it really is.
So, if you please, do not hide it from me, but begin over again and tell me what holiness is, no matter whether it is loved by the gods or anything else happens it; for we shall not quarrel about that.
But tell me frankly, What is holiness, and what is unholiness?
Euthyphro
But, Socrates, I do not know how to say what I mean.
For whatever statement we advance, somehow or other it moves about and won't stay where we put it.
Socrates
Your statements, Euthyphro, are like works of my ancestor Daedalus,
and if I were the one who made or advanced them, you might laugh at me and say that on account of my relationship to him my works in words run away and won't stay where they are put.
But now well, the statements are yours; so some other jest is demanded; for they stay fixed, as you yourself see.
Euthyphro
I think the jest does very well as it is; for I am not the one who makes these statements move about and not stay in the same place, but you are the Daedalus; for they would have stayed, so far as I am concerned.
Socrates
Apparently then, my friend, I am a more clever artist than that man, inasmuch as he made only his own works move, whereas I, as it seems, give motion to the works of others as well as to my own.
And the most exquisite thing about my art is that I am clever against my will; for I would rather have my words stay fixed and stable than possess the wisdom of Daedalus and the wealth of Tantalus besides.
But enough of this.
Since you seem to be indolent, I will aid you myself, so that you may instruct me about holiness.
And do not give it up beforehand.
Just see whether you do not think that everything that is holy is right.
Euthyphro
I do.
Socrates
But is everything that is right also holy?
Or is all which is holy right, and not all which is right holy, but part of it holy and part something else?
Euthyphro
I can't follow you, Socrates.
Socrates
And yet you are as much younger than I as you are wiser; but, as I said, you are indolent on account of your wealth of wisdom.
But exert yourself, my friend; for it is not hard to understand what I mean.
What I mean is the opposite of what the poet said, who wrote:"Zeus the creator, him who made all things,"
"thou wilt not name; for where fear is, there also is reverence."
Now I disagree with the poet.
Shall I tell you how?
Euthyphro
By all means.
Socrates
It does not seem to me true that where fear is, there also is reverence; for many who fear diseases and poverty and other such things seem to me to fear, but not to reverence at all these things which they fear.
Don't you think so, too?
Euthyphro
Certainly.
Socrates
But I think that where reverence is, there also is fear; for does not everyone who has a feeling of reverence and shame about any act also dread and fear the reputation for wickedness?
Euthyphro
Yes, he does fear.
Socrates
Then it is not correct to say "where fear is, there also is reverence."
On the contrary, where reverence is, there also is fear; but reverence is not everywhere where fear is, since, as I think, fear is more comprehensive than reverence; for reverence is a part of fear, just as the odd is a part of number, so that it is not true that where number is, there also is the odd, but that where the odd is, there also is number.
Perhaps you follow me now?
Euthyphro
Perfectly.
Socrates
It was something of this sort that I meant before, when I asked whether where the right is, there also is holiness,
or where holiness is, there also is the right; but holiness is not everywhere where the right is, for holiness is a part of the right.
Do we agree to this, or do you dissent?
Euthyphro
No, I agree;
for I think the statement is correct.
Socrates
Now observe the next point.
If holiness is a part of the right, we must, apparently, find out what part of the right holiness is.
Now if you asked me about one of the things I just mentioned, as, for example, what part of number the even was, and what kind of a number it was I should say, "that which is not indivisible by two, but divisible by two"; or don't you agree?
Euthyphro
I agree.
Socrates
Now try in your turn to teach me what part of the right holiness is, that I may tell Meletus not to wrong me any more or bring suits against me for impiety, since I have now been duly instructed by you about what is, and what is not, pious and holy.
Euthyphro
This then is my opinion, Socrates, that the part of the right which has to do with attention to the gods constitutes piety and holiness, and that the remaining part of the right is that which has to do with the service of men.
Socrates
I think you are correct, Euthyphro; but there is one little point about which I still want information, for I do not yet understand what you mean by "attention."
I don't suppose you mean the same kind of attention to the gods which is paid to other things.
We say, for example, that not everyone knows how to attend to horses, but only he who is skilled in horsemanship, do we not?
Euthyphro
Certainly.
Socrates
Then horsemanship is the art of attending to horses?
Euthyphro
Yes.
Socrates
And not everyone knows how to attend to dogs, but only the huntsman?
Euthyphro
That is so.
Socrates
Then the huntsman's art is the art of attending to dogs?
Euthyphro
Yes.
Socrates
And the oxherd's art is that of attending to oxen?
Euthyphro
Certainly.
Socrates
And holiness and piety is the art of attending to the gods?
Is that what you mean, Euthyphro?
Euthyphro
Yes.
Socrates
Now does attention always aim to accomplish the same end?
I mean something like this: It aims at some good or benefit to the one to whom it is given, as you see that horses, when attended to by the horseman's art are benefited and made better; or don't you think so?
Euthyphro
Yes, I do.
Socrates
And dogs are benefited by the huntsman's art and oxen by the oxherd's and everything else in the same way?
Or do you think care and attention are ever meant for the injury of that which is cared for?
Euthyphro
No, by Zeus, I do not.
Socrates
But for its benefit?
Euthyphro
Of course.
Socrates
Then holiness, since it is the art of attending to the gods, is a benefit to the gods, and makes them better?
And you would agree that when you do a holy or pious act you are making one of the gods better?
Euthyphro
No, by Zeus, not I.
Socrates
Nor do I, Euthyphro, think that is what you meant.
Far from it.
But I asked what you meant by "attention to the gods" just because I did not think you meant anything like that.
Euthyphro
You are right, Socrates; that is not what I mean.
Socrates
Well, what kind of attention to the gods is holiness?
Euthyphro
The kind, Socrates, that servants pay to their masters.
Socrates
I understand.
It is, you mean, a kind of service to the gods?
Euthyphro
Exactly.
Socrates
Now can you tell me what result the art that serves the physician serves to produce?
Is it not health?
Euthyphro
Yes.
Euthyphro
Evidently, Socrates, a ship.
Socrates
And that which serves housebuilders serves to build a house?
Euthyphro
Yes.
Socrates
Then tell me, my friend; what would the art which serves the gods serve to accomplish?
For it is evident that you know, since you say you know more than any other man about matters which have to do with the gods.
Euthyphro
And what I say is true, Socrates.
Socrates
Then, in the name of Zeus, tell me, what is that glorious result which the gods accomplish by using us as servants?
Euthyphro
They accomplish many fine results, Socrates.
Socrates
Yes, and so do generals, my friend; but nevertheless, you could easily tell the chief of them, namely, that they bring about victory in war.
Is that not the case?
Euthyphro
Of course.
Socrates
And farmers also, I think, accomplish many fine results; but still the chief result of their work is food from the land?
Euthyphro
Certainly.
Socrates
But how about the many fine results the gods accomplish?
What is the chief result of their work?
Euthyphro
I told you a while ago, Socrates, that it is a long task to learn accurately all about these things.
However, I say simply that when one knows how to say and do what is gratifying to the gods, in praying and sacrificing, that is holiness, and such things bring salvation to individual families and to states; and the opposite of what is gratifying to the gods is impious, and that overturns and destroys everything.
Socrates
You might, if you wished, Euthyphro, have answered much more briefly the chief part of my question.
But it is plain that you do not care to instruct me.
For now, when you were close upon it you turned aside; and if you had answered it, I should already have obtained from you all the instruction I need about holiness.
But, as things are, the questioner must follow the one questioned wherever he leads.
What do you say the holy, or holiness, is?
Do you not say that it is a kind of science of sacrificing and praying?
Euthyphro
Yes.
Socrates
And sacrificing is making gifts to the gods and praying is asking from them?
Euthyphro
Exactly, Socrates.
Socrates
Then holiness, according to this definition, would be a science of giving and asking.
Euthyphro
You understand perfectly what I said, Socrates.
Socrates
Yes, my friend, for I am eager for your wisdom, and give my mind to it, so that nothing you say shall fall to the ground.
But tell me, what is this service of the gods?
Do you say that it consists in asking from them and giving to them?
Euthyphro
Yes.
Socrates
Would not the right way of asking be to ask of them what we need from them?
Euthyphro
What else?
Socrates
And the right way of giving, to present them with what they need from us?
For it would not be scientific giving to give anyone what he does not need.
Euthyphro
You are right, Socrates.
Socrates
Then holiness would be an art of barter between gods and men?
Euthyphro
Yes, of barter, if you like to call it so.
Socrates
I don't like to call it so, if it is not true.
But tell me, what advantage accrues to the gods from the gifts they get from us?
For everybody knows what they give, since we have nothing good which they do not give.
But what advantage do they derive from what they get from us?
Or have we so much the better of them in our bartering that we get all good things from them and they nothing from us?
Euthyphro
Why you don't suppose, Socrates, that the gods gain any advantage from what they get from us, do you?
Socrates
Well then, what would those gifts of ours to the gods be?
Euthyphro
What else than honor and praise, and, as I said before, gratitude?
Socrates
Then, Euthyphro, holiness is grateful to the gods, but not advantageous or precious to the gods?
Euthyphro
I think it is precious, above all things.
Socrates
Then again, it seems, holiness is that which is precious to the gods.
Euthyphro
Certainly.
Socrates
Then will you be surprised, since you say this, if your words do not remain fixed but walk about, and will you accuse me of being the Daedalus who makes them walk, when you are yourself much more skilful than Daedalus and make them go round in a circle?
Or do you not see that our definition has come round to the point from which it started?
For you remember, I suppose, that a while ago we found that holiness and what is dear to the gods were not the same, but different from each other; or do you not remember?
Euthyphro
Yes, I remember.
Socrates
Then don't you see that now you say that what is precious to the gods is holy?
And is not this what is dear to the gods?
Euthyphro
Certainly.
Socrates
Then either our agreement a while ago was wrong, or if that was right, we are wrong now.
Euthyphro
So it seems.
Socrates
Then we must begin again at the beginning and ask what holiness is.
Since I shall not willingly give up until I learn.
And do not scorn me, but by all means apply your mind now to the utmost and tell me the truth; for you know, if anyone does, and like Proteus, you must be held until you speak.
For if you had not clear knowledge of holiness and unholiness, you would surely not have undertaken to prosecute your aged father for murder for the sake of a servant.
You would have been afraid to risk the anger of the gods, in case your conduct should be wrong, and would have been ashamed in the sight of men.
But now I am sure you think you know what is holy and what is not.
So tell me, most excellent Euthyphro, and do not conceal your thought.
Euthyphro
Some other time, Socrates.
Now I am in a hurry and it is time for me to go.
Socrates
Oh my friend, what are you doing?
You go away and leave me cast down from the high hope I had that I should learn from you what is holy, and what is not, and should get rid of Meletus's indictment by showing him that I have been made wise by Euthyphro about divine matters and am no longer through ignorance acting carelessly and making innovations in respect to them, and that I shall live a better life henceforth.
Hippias Major
Socrates
Hippias
Socrates
Hippias, beautiful and wise, what a long time it is since you have put in at the port of Athens!
Hippias
I am too busy, Socrates.
For whenever Elis needs to have any business transacted with any of the states, she always comes to me first of her citizens and chooses me as envoy, thinking that I am the ablest judge and messenger of the words that are spoken by the several states.
So I have often gone as envoy to other states, but most often and concerning the most numerous and important matters to Lacedaemon.
For that reason, then, since you ask me, I do not often come to this neighborhood.
Socrates
That's what it is, Hippias, to be a truly wise and perfect man!
For you are both in your private capacity able to earn much money from the young and to confer upon them still greater benefits than you receive, and in public affairs you are able to benefit your own state, as a man must who is to be not despised but held in high repute among the many.
And yet, Hippias, what in the world is the reason why those men of old whose names are called great in respect to wisdom Pittacus, and Bias, and the Milesian Thales with his followers and also the later ones, down to Anaxagoras, are all, or most of them, found to refrain from affairs of state?
Hippias
What else do you suppose, Socrates, than that they were not able to compass by their wisdom both public and private matters?
Socrates
Then for Heaven's sake, just as the other arts have progressed, and the ancients are of no account in comparison with the artisans of today, shall we say that your art also has progressed and those of the ancients who were concerned with wisdom are of no account in comparison with you?
Hippias
Yes, you are quite right.
Socrates
Then, Hippias, if Bias were to come to life again now, he would be a laughing-stock in comparison with you, just as the sculptors say that Daedalus, if he were to be born now and were to create such works as those from which he got his reputation, would be ridiculous.
Hippias
That, Socrates, is exactly as you say.
I, however, am in the habit of praising the ancients and our predecessors rather than the men of the present day, and more greatly, as a precaution against the envy of the living and through fear of the wrath of those who are dead.
Socrates
Yours, Hippias, is a most excellent way, at any rate, of speaking about them and of thinking, it seems to me and I can bear you witness that you speak the truth, and that your art really has progressed in the direction of ability to carry on public together with private affairs.
For this man Gorgias, the sophist from Leontini, came here from home in the public capacity of envoy, as being best able of all the citizens of Leontini to attend to the interests of the community, and it was the general opinion that he spoke excellently in the public assembly, and in his private capacity, by giving exhibitions and associating with the young, he earned and received a great deal of money from this city;
or, if you like,
our friend here, Prodicus, often went to other places in a public capacity, and the last time, just lately, when he came here in a public capacity from Ceos, he gained great reputation by his speaking before the Council, and in his private capacity, by giving exhibitions and associating with the young, he received a marvellous sum of money;
but none of those ancients ever thought fit to exact the money as payment for his wisdom or to give exhibitions among people of various places; so simple-minded were they, and so unconscious of the fact that money is of the greatest value.
But either of these two has earned more money from his wisdom than any artisan from his art.
And even before these Protagoras did so.
Hippias
Why, Socrates, you know nothing of the beauties of this.
For if you were to know how much money I have made, you would be amazed.
I won't mention the rest, but once, when I went to Sicily, although Protagoras was staying there and had a great reputation and was the older, I, who was much younger, made in a very short time more than one hundred and fifty minas, and in one very small place, Inycus, more than twenty minas; and when I came home, I took this and gave it to my father, so that he and the other citizens were overwhelmed with amazement.
And I pretty well think I have made more money than any other two sophists together.
Socrates
That's a fine thing you say, Hippias, and strong testimony to your wisdom and that of the men of today and to their great superiority to the ancients.
For the earlier sophists of the school of Anaxagoras must have been very ignorant to judge from what is said, according to your view;
for they say that what happened to Anaxagoras was the opposite of what happens to you; for though much money was left him, he neglected it and lost it all so senseless was his wisdom.
And they tell similar tales about others among the ancients.
So this seems to me fine testimony that you adduce for the wisdom of the men of today as compared with the earlier men, and many people agree with me that the wise man must be wise for himself especially;
and the test of this is, who makes the most money.
Well, so much for that.
But tell me this: at which of the cities that you go to did you make the most money?
Or are we to take it that it was at Lacedaemon, where your visits have been most frequent?
Hippias
No, by Zeus, it was not, Socrates.
Socrates
What's that you say?
But did you make least there?
Hippias
Why, I never made anything at all.
Socrates
That is a prodigious marvel that you tell, Hippias;
and say now: is not your wisdom such as to make those who are in contact with it and learn it, better men in respect to virtue?
Hippias
Yes, much better, Socrates.
Socrates
But you were able to make the sons of the Inycenes better, and had no power to improve the sons of the Spartans?
Hippias
That is far from true.
Socrates
Well, then, the Siceliotes desire to become better, and the Lacedaemonians do not?
Hippias
No certainly, Socrates, the Lacedaemonians also desire it.
Socrates
Then it was for lack of money that they avoided intercourse with you?
Hippias
Not at all, since they have plenty of money.
Socrates
What, then, could be the reason, that when they desired it and had money, and you had power to confer upon them the greatest benefits, they did not send you away loaded with money?
But I see; perhaps the Lacedaemonians might educate their own children better than you?
Shall we state it so, and do you agree?
Hippias
Not in the least.
Socrates
Then were you not able to persuade the young men at Lacedaemon that they would make more progress towards virtue by associating with you than with their own people, or were you powerless to persuade their fathers that they ought rather to hand them over to you than to care for them themselves, if they are at all concerned for their sons?
For surely they did not begrudge it to their children to become as good as possible.
Hippias
I do not think they begrudged it.
Socrates
But certainly Lacedaemon is well governed.
Hippias
Of course it is.
Socrates
And in well-governed states virtue is most highly honored.
Hippias
Certainly.
Socrates
And you know best of all men how to transmit that to another.
Hippias
Much best, Socrates.
Socrates
Well, he who knows best how to transmit horsemanship would be most honored in Thessaly of all parts of Greece and would receive most money and anywhere else where horsemanship is a serious interest, would he not?
Hippias
Very likely.
Socrates
Then will not he who is able to transmit the doctrines that are of most value for the acquisition of virtue be most highly honored in Lacedaemon and make most money, if he so wishes, and in any other of the Greek states that is well governed?
But do you, my friend, think he will fare better in Sicily and at Inycus?
Are we to believe that, Hippias?
For if you tell us to do so, we must believe it.
Hippias
Yes, for it is not the inherited usage of the Lacedaemonians to change their laws or to educate their children differently from what is customary.
Socrates
What?
For the Lacedaemonians is it the hereditary usage not to act rightly, but to commit errors?
Hippias
I wouldn't say so, Socrates.
Socrates
Would they, then, not act rightly in educating the young men better, but not in educating them worse?
Hippias
Yes, they would; but it is not lawful for them to give them a foreign education; for you may be sure that if anybody had ever received money there in payment for education, I should have received by far the most; they certainly enjoy hearing me and they applaud me; but, as I say, it is not the law.
Socrates
But, Hippias, do you say that law is an injury to the state, or a benefit?
Hippias
It is made, I think, with benefit in view, but sometimes, if the law is badly made, it is injurious.
Socrates
Well, then, is it not true that those who make the law make it as the greatest good to the state?
and that without this it is impossible to enjoy good government?
Hippias
What you say is true.
Socrates
Then, when those who make the laws miss the good, they have missed the lawful and the law; or what do you say?
Hippias
Speaking accurately, Socrates, that is true; however, men are not accustomed to think so.
Socrates
The men who know, Hippias, or those who do not know?
Hippias
The many.
Socrates
Are these, the many, those who know the truth?
Hippias
Certainly not.
Socrates
But surely those who know, think that in truth for all men that which is more beneficial is more lawful than that which is less beneficial; or do you not agree?
Hippias
Yes, I agree that they think it is so in truth.
Socrates
Well, it actually is as those who know think it is, is it not?
Hippias
Certainly.
Socrates
But or the Lacedaemonians, as you say, it is more beneficial to be educated in your education, which is foreign, than in the local education.
Hippias
Yes, and what I say is true.
Socrates
And do you say this also, Hippias, that beneficial things are more lawful?
Hippias
Yes, I said so.
Socrates
Then, according to what you say, it is more lawful for the sons of the Lacedaemonians to be educated by Hippias and less lawful for them to be educated by their fathers, if in reality they will be more benefited by you.
Hippias
But certainly they will be benefited, Socrates.
Socrates
Then the Lacedaemonians in not giving you money and entrusting their sons to you , act contrary to law.
Hippias
I agree to that; for you seem to be making your argument in my favour, and there is no need of my opposing it.
Socrates
Then my friends, we find that the Lacedaemonians are law-breakers, and that too in the most important affairs they who are regarded as the most law-abiding of men.
But then, for Heaven's sake, Hippias, what sort of discourses are those for which they applaud you and which they enjoy hearing?
Or are they evidently those which you understand most admirably, those about the stars and the phenomena of the heavens?
Hippias
Not in the least; they won't even endure those.
Socrates
But they enjoy hearing about geometry?
Hippias
Not at all, since one might say that many of them do not even know how to count.
Socrates
Then they are far from enduring a lecture by you on the processes of thought.
Hippias
Far from it indeed, by Zeus.
Socrates
Well, then, those matters which you of all men know best how to discuss, concerning the value of letters and syllables and rhythms and harmonies?
Hippias
Harmonies indeed, my good fellow, and letters!
Socrates
But then what are the things about which they like to listen to you and which they applaud?
Tell me yourself, for I cannot discover them.
Hippias
They are very fond of hearing about the genealogies of heroes and men, Socrates, and the foundations of cities in ancient times and, in short, about antiquity in general, so that for their sake I have been obliged to learn all that sort of thing by heart and practise it thoroughly.
Socrates
By Zeus, Hippias, it is lucky for you that the Lacedaemonians do not enjoy hearing one recite the list of our archons from Solon's time; if they did, you would have trouble in learning it by heart.
Hippias
How so, Socrates?
After hearing them once, I can remember fifty names.
Socrates
True, but I did not understand that you possess the science of memory; and so I understand that the Lacedaemonians naturally enjoy you as one who knows many things, and they make use of you as children make use of old women, to tell stories agreeably.
Hippias
And by Zeus, Socrates, I have just lately gained reputation there by telling about noble or beautiful pursuits, recounting what those of a young man should be.
For I have a very beautiful discourse composed about them, well arranged in its words and also in other respects.
And the plan of the discourse, and its beginning, is something like this: After the fall of Troy, the story goes that Neoptolemus asked Nestor what the noble and beautiful pursuits were, by following which a young man would become most famous; so after that we have Nestor speaking and suggesting to him very many lawful and most beautiful pursuits.
That discourse, then, I delivered there and intend to deliver here the day after tomorrow in Pheidostratus's schoolroom, with many other things worth hearing; for Eudicus, the son of Apemantus, asked me to do so.
Now be sure to be there yourself and to bring others who are able to judge of discourses that they hear.
Socrates
Well, that shall be done, God willing, Hippias.
Now, however, give me a brief answer to a question about your discourse, for you reminded me of the beautiful just at the right moment.
For recently, my most excellent friend, as I was finding fault with some things in certain speeches as ugly and praising other things as beautiful, a man threw me into confusion by questioning me very insolently somewhat after this fashion: "How, if you please, do you know, Socrates," said he, "what sort of things are beautiful and ugly?
For, come now, could you tell me what the beautiful is?"
And I, being of no account, was at a loss and could not answer him properly; and so, as I was going away from the company, I was angry with myself and reproached myself, and threatened that the first time I met one of you wise men, I would hear and learn and practise and then go back to the man who questioned me to renew the wordy strife.
So now, as I say, you have come at the right moment; just teach me satisfactorily what the absolute beautiful is, and try in replying to speak as accurately as possible, that I may not be confuted a second time and be made ridiculous again.
For you doubtless know clearly, and this would doubtless be but a small example of your wide learning.
Hippias
Yes, surely, by Zeus, a small one, Socrates, and, I may say, of no value.
Socrates
Then I shall learn it easily, and nobody will confute me any more.
Hippias
Nobody, surely; for in that case my profession would be worthless and ordinary.
Socrates
That is good, by Hera, Hippias, if we are to worst the fellow.
But may I without hindering you imitate him, and when you answer, take exception to what you say, in order that you may give me as much practice as possible?
For I am more or less experienced in taking exceptions.
So, if it is all the same to you, I wish to take exceptions, that I may learn more vigorously.
Hippias
Oh yes, take exceptions.
For, as I said just now, the question is no great matter, but I could teach you to answer much harder ones than this, so that nobody in the world could confute you.
Socrates
Oh how good that is!
But come, since you tell me to do so, now let me try to play that man's part, so far as possible, and ask you questions.
For if you were to deliver for him this discourse that you mention, the one about beautiful pursuits, when he had heard it, after you had stopped speaking, the very first thing he would ask about would be the beautiful; for he has that sort of habit, and he would say, "Stranger from Elis, is it not by justice that the just are just?"
So answer, Hippias, as though he were asking the question.
Hippias
I shall answer that it is by justice.
Socrates
"Then this I mean justice is something?"
Hippias
Certainly.
Socrates
"Then, too, by wisdom the wise are wise and by the good all things are good, are they not?"
Hippias
Of course.
Socrates
"And justice, wisdom, and so forth are something; for the just, wise, and so forth would not be such by them, if they were not something."
Hippias
To be sure, they are something.
Socrates
"Then are not all beautiful things beautiful by the beautiful?"
Hippias
Yes, by the beautiful.
Socrates
"By the beautiful, which is something?"
Hippias
Yes, for what alternative is there?
Socrates
"Tell me, then, stranger," he will say, "what is this, the beautiful?"
Hippias
Well, Socrates, does he who asks this question want to find out anything else than what is beautiful?
Socrates
I do not think that is what he wants to find out, but what the beautiful is.
Hippias
And what difference is there between the two?
Socrates
Do you think there is none?
Hippias
Yes, for there is no difference.
Socrates
Well, surely it is plain that you know best;
but still, my good friend, consider; for he asked you, not what is beautiful, but what the beautiful is.
Hippias
I understand, my good friend, and I will answer and tell him what the beautiful is, and I shall never be confuted.
For be assured, Socrates, if I must speak the truth, a beautiful maiden is beautiful.
Socrates
Beautifully answered, Hippias, by the dog, and notably!
Then if I give this answer, I shall have answered the question that was asked, and shall have answered it correctly, and shall never be confuted?
Hippias
Yes, for how could you, Socrates, be confuted, when you say what everybody thinks, and when all who hear it will bear witness that what you say is correct?
Socrates
Very well; certainly.
Come, then, Hippias, let me rehearse to myself what you say.
The man will question me in some such fashion as this: "Come Socrates, answer me.
All these things which you say are beautiful, if the absolute beautiful is anything, would be beautiful?"
And I shall say that if a beautiful maiden is beautiful, there is something by reason of which these things would be beautiful.
Hippias
Do you think, then, that he will still attempt to refute you and to show that what you say is not beautiful, or, if he does attempt it, that he will not be ridiculous?
Socrates
That he will attempt it, my admirable friend, I am sure but whether the attempt will make him ridiculous, the event will show.
However, I should like to tell you what he will ask.
Hippias
Do so.
Socrates
"How charming you are, Socrates!" he will say.
"But is not a beautiful mare beautiful, which even the god praised in his oracle?"
What shall we say, Hippias?
Shall we not say that the mare is beautiful, I mean the beautiful mare?
For how could we dare to deny that the beautiful thing is beautiful?
Hippias
Quite true, Socrates for what the god said is quite correct, too; for very beautiful mares are bred in our country.
Socrates
"Very well," he will say, "and how about a beautiful lyre?
Is it not beautiful?"
Shall we agree, Hippias?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
After this, then, the man will ask, I am sure, judging by his character: "You most excellent man, how about a beautiful pot?
Is it, then, not beautiful?"
Hippias
Socrates, who is the fellow?
What an uncultivated person, who has the face to mention such worthless things in a dignified discussion!
Socrates
That's the kind of person he is, Hippias, not elegant, but vulgar, thinking of nothing but the truth.
But nevertheless the man must be answered, and I will declare my opinion beforehand: if the pot were made by a good potter, were smooth and round and well fired, as are some of the two-handled pots, those that hold six choes, very beautiful ones if that were the kind of pot he asked about, we must agree that it is beautiful;
for how could we say that being beautiful it is not beautiful?
Hippias
We could not at all, Socrates.
Socrates
"Then," he will say, "a beautiful pot also is beautiful, is it not?"
Answer.
Hippias
Well, Socrates, it is like this, I think.
This utensil, when well wrought, is beautiful, but absolutely considered it does not deserve to be regarded as beautiful in comparison with a mare and a maiden and all the beautiful things.
Socrates
Very well I understand, Hippias, that the proper reply to him who asks these questions is this: "Sir, you are not aware that the saying of Heracleitus is good, that the most beautiful of monkeys is ugly compared with the race of man, and the most beautiful of pots is ugly compared with the race of maidens, as Hippias the wise man says."
Is it not so, Hippias?
Hippias
Certainly, Socrates; you replied rightly.
Socrates
Listen then.
For I am sure that after this he will say: "Yes, but, Socrates, if we compare maidens with gods, will not the same thing happen to them that happened to pots when compared with maidens?
Will not the most beautiful maiden appear ugly?
Or does not Heracleitus, whom you cite, mean just this, that the wisest of men, if compared with a god, will appear a monkey, both in wisdom and in beauty and in everything else?"
Shall we agree, Hippias, that the most beautiful maiden is ugly if compared with the gods?
Hippias
Yes, for who would deny that, Socrates?
Socrates
If, then, we agree to that, he will laugh and say: "Socrates, do you remember the question you were asked?"
"I do," I shall say, "the question was what the absolute beautiful is."
"Then," he will say, "when you were asked for the beautiful, do you give as your reply what is, as you yourself say, no more beautiful than ugly?"
"So it seems," I shall say; or what do you, my friend, advise me to say?
Hippias
That is what I advise; for, of course, in saying that the human race is not beautiful in comparison with gods, you will be speaking the truth.
Socrates
"But if I had asked you," he will say, "in the beginning what is beautiful and ugly, if you had replied as you now do, would you not have replied correctly?
But do you still think that the absolute beautiful, by the addition of which all other things are adorned and made to appear beautiful, when its form is added to any of them do you think that is a maiden or a mare or a lyre?"
Hippias
Well, certainly, Socrates, if that is what he is looking for, nothing is easier than to answer and tell him what the beautiful is, by which all other things are adorned and by the addition of which they are made to appear beautiful.
So the fellow is very simple-minded and knows nothing about beautiful possessions.
For if you reply to him: "This that you ask about, the beautiful, is nothing else but gold," he will be thrown into confusion and will not attempt to confute you.
For we all know, I fancy, that wherever this is added, even what before appears ugly will appear beautiful when adorned with gold.
Socrates
You don't know the man, Hippias, what a wretch he is, and how certain not to accept anything easily.
Hippias
What of that, then, Socrates?
For he must perforce accept what is correct, or if he does not accept it, be ridiculous.
Socrates
This reply, my most excellent friend, he not only will certainly not accept, but he will even jeer at me grossly and will say: "You lunatic, do you think Pheidias is a bad craftsman?"
And I shall say, "Not in the least."
Hippias
And you will be right, Socrates.
Socrates
Yes, to be sure.
Consequently when I agree that Pheidias is a good craftsman, "Well, then," he will say, "do you imagine that Pheidias did not know this beautiful that you speak of?"
"Why do you ask that?"
I shall say.
"Because," he will say, "he did not make the eyes of his Athena of gold, nor the rest of her face, nor her hands and feet, if, that is, they were sure to appear most beautiful provided only they were made of gold, but he made them of ivory; evidently he made this mistake through ignorance, not knowing that it is gold which makes everything beautiful to which it is added."
When he says that, what reply shall we make to him, Hippias?
Hippias
That is easy; for we shall say that he did right;
for ivory, I think, is beautiful.
Socrates
"Why, then," he will say, "did he not make the middle parts of the eyes also of ivory, but of stone, procuring stone as similar as possible to the ivory?
Or is beautiful stone also beautiful?"
Shall we say that it is, Hippias?
Hippias
Surely we shall say so, that is, where it is appropriate.
Socrates
"But ugly when not appropriate?"
Shall I agree, or not?
Hippias
Agree, that is, when it is not appropriate.
Socrates
"What then?
Do not gold and ivory," he will say, "when they are appropriate, make things beautiful, and when they are not appropriate, ugly?"
Shall we deny that, or agree that what he says is correct?
Hippias
We shall agree to this, at any rate, that whatever is appropriate to any particular thing makes that thing beautiful.
Socrates
"Well, then," he will say, "when some one has boiled the pot of which we were speaking just now, the beautiful one, full of beautiful soup, is a golden ladle appropriate to it, or one made of fig wood?"
Hippias
Heracles, what a fellow this is that you speak of!
Won't you tell me who he is?
Socrates
You would not know him if I should tell you his name.
Hippias
But even now I know that he is an ignoramus.
Socrates
He is a great nuisance, Hippias but yet, what shall we say?
Which of the two ladles shall we say is appropriate to the soup and the pot?
Is it not evidently the one of fig wood?
For it is likely to make the soup smell better, and besides, my friend, it would not break the pot, thereby spilling the soup, putting out the fire, and making those who are to be entertained go without their splendid soup; whereas the golden ladle would do all those things, so that it seems to me that we must say that the wooden ladle is more appropriate than the golden one, unless you disagree.
Hippias
No, for it is more appropriate, Socrates; however, I, for my part, would not talk with the fellow when he asks such questions.
Socrates
Quite right, my friend; for it would not be appropriate for you to be filled up with such words, you who are so beautifully clad, so beautifully shod, and so famous for your wisdom among all the Greeks; but for me it doesn't matter if I do associate with the fellow; so instruct me and for my sake answer him.
"For if the wooden one is more appropriate than the golden one," the fellow will say, "would it not be more beautiful, since you agreed, Socrates, that the appropriate is more beautiful than that which is not appropriate?"
Shall we not agree, Hippias, that the wooden one is more beautiful than the golden?
Hippias
Do you wish me to tell you, Socrates, what definition of the beautiful will enable you to free yourself from long discussion?
Socrates
Certainly; but not until after you have told me which of the two ladles I just spoke of I shall reply is appropriate and more beautiful.
Hippias
Well, if you like, reply to him that it is the one made of fig wood.
Socrates
Now, then, say what you were just now going to say.
For by this reply, if I say that the beautiful is gold, it seems to me that gold will be shown to be no more beautiful than fig wood; but what do you now, once more, say that the beautiful is?
Hippias
I will tell you;
for you seem to me to be seeking to reply that the beautiful is something of such sort that it will never appear ugly anywhere to anybody.
Socrates
Certainly, Hippias; now you understand beautifully.
Hippias
Listen, then; for, mind you, if anyone has anything to say against this, you may say I know nothing at all.
Socrates
Then for Heaven's sake, speak as quickly as you can.
Hippias
I say, then, that for every man and everywhere it is most beautiful to be rich and healthy, and honored by the Greeks, to reach old age, and, after providing a beautiful funeral for his deceased parents, to be beautifully and splendidly buried by his own offspring.
Socrates
Bravo, bravo, Hippias!
You have spoken in a way that is wonderful and great and worthy of you; and now, by Hera, I thank you, because you are kindly coming to my assistance to the best of your ability.
But our shots are not hitting the man; no, he will laugh at us now more than ever, be sure of that.
Hippias
A wretched laugh, Socrates; for when he has nothing to say to this, but laughs, he will be laughing at himself and will himself be laughed at by those present.
Socrates
Perhaps that is so perhaps, however, after this reply, he will, I foresee, be likely to do more than laugh at me.
Hippias
Why do you say that, pray?
Socrates
Because, if he happens to have a stick, unless I get away in a hurry, he will try to fetch me a good one.
Hippias
What?
Is the fellow some sort of master of yours, and if he does that, will he not be arrested and have to pay for it?
Or does your city disregard justice and allow the citizens to beat one another unjustly?
Socrates
Oh no that is not allowed at all.
Hippias
Then he will have to pay a penalty for beating you unjustly.
Socrates
I do not think so, Hippias.
No, if I were to make that reply, the beating would be just, I think.
Hippias
Then I think so, too, Socrates, since that is your own belief.
Socrates
Shall I, then, not tell you why it is my own belief that the beating would be just, if I made that reply?
Or will you also beat me without trial?
Or will you listen to what I have to say?
Hippias
It would be shocking if I would not listen; but what have you to say?
Socrates
I will tell you, imitating him in the same way as a while ago, that I may not use to you such harsh and uncouth words as he uses to me.
For you may be sure, "Tell me, Socrates," he will say, "do you think it would be unjust if you got a beating for singing such a long dithyramb so unmusically and so far from the question?"
"How so?"
I shall say.
"How so?"
he will say;
"are you not able to remember that I asked for the absolute beautiful, by which everything to which it is added has the property of being beautiful, both stone and stick and man and god and every act and every acquisition of knowledge?
For what I am asking is this, man: what is absolute beauty?
and I cannot make you hear what I say any more than if you were a stone sitting beside me, and a millstone at that, having neither ears nor brain."
Would you, then, not be angry, Hippias,if I should be frightened and should reply in this way?
"Well, but Hippias said that this was the beautiful; and yet I asked him, just as you asked me, what is beautiful to all and always."
What do you say?
Will you not be angry if I say that?
Hippias
I know very well, Socrates, that this which I said was beautiful is beautiful to all and will seem so.
Socrates
And will it be so, too he will say for the beautiful is always beautiful, is it not?
Hippias
Certainly.
Socrates
"Then was it so, too?"
he will say.
Hippias
It was so, too.
Socrates
"And," he will say, "did the stranger from Elis say also that for Achilles it was beautiful to be buried later than his parents, and for his grandfather Aeacus, and all the others who were born of gods, and for the gods themselves?"
Hippias
What's that?
Confound it!
These questions of the fellow's are not even respectful to religion.
Socrates
Well, then, when another asks the question, perhaps it is not quite disrespectful to religion to say that these things are so?
Hippias
Perhaps.
Socrates
"Perhaps, then, you are the man," he will say, "who says that it is beautiful for every one and always to be buried by one's offspring, and to bury one's parents; or was not Heracles included in 'every one,' he and all those whom we just now mentioned?"
Hippias
But I did not say it was so for the gods.
Socrates
"Nor for the heroes either, apparently."
Hippias
Not those who were children of gods.
Socrates
"But those who were not?"
Hippias
Certainly.
Socrates
"Then again, according to your statement, among the heroes it is terrible and impious and disgraceful for Tantalus and Dardanus and Zethus, but beautiful for Pelops and the others who were born as he was?"
Hippias
I think so.
Socrates
"You think, then, what you did not say just now, that to bury one's parents and be buried by one's offspring is sometimes and for some persons disgraceful; and it is still more impossible, as it seems, for this to become and to be beautiful for all, so that the same thing has happened to this as to the things we mentioned before, the maiden and the pot, in a still more ridiculous way than to them; it is beautiful for some and not beautiful for others.
And you are not able yet, even today, Socrates," he will say, "to answer what is asked about the beautiful, namely what it is."
With these words and the like he will rebuke me, if I reply to him in this way.
For the most part, Hippias, he talks with me in some such way as that but sometimes, as if in pity for my inexperience and lack of training, he himself volunteers a question, and asks whether I think the beautiful is so and so or whatever else it is which happens to be the subject of our questions and our discussion.
Hippias
What do you mean by that, Socrates?
Socrates
I will tell you.
"Oh, my dear Socrates," he says, "stop making replies of this sort and in this way for they are too silly and easy to refute; but see if something like this does not seem to you to be beautiful, which we got hold of just now in our reply, when we said that gold was beautiful for those things for which it was appropriate, but not for those for which it was not, and that all the other things were beautiful to which this quality pertains; so examine this very thing, the appropriate, and see if it is perchance the beautiful."
Now I am accustomed to agree to such things every time for I don't know what to say; but now does it seem to you that the appropriate is the beautiful?
Hippias
Yes, certainly, Socrates.
Socrates
Let us consider, lest we make a mistake somehow.
Hippias
Yes, we must consider.
Socrates
See, then; do we say that the appropriate is that which, when it is added, makes each of those things to which it is added appear beautiful, or which makes them be beautiful, or neither of these?
Hippias
That which makes them appear beautiful; as when a man takes clothes or shoes that fit, even if he be ridiculous, he appears more beautiful.
Socrates
Then if the appropriate makes him appear more beautiful than he is, the appropriate would be a sort of deceit in respect to the beautiful, and would not be that which we are looking for, would it, Hippias?
For we were rather looking for that by which all beautiful things are beautiful like that by which all great things are great, that is, excess; for it is by this that all great things are great; for even if they do not appear great, but exceed, they are of necessity great; so, then, we say, what would the beautiful be, by which all things are beautiful, whether they appear so or not?
For it could not be the appropriate, since that, by your statement, makes things appear more beautiful than they are, but does not let them appear such as they are.
But we must try to say what that is which makes things be beautiful, as I said just now, whether they appear so or not; for that is what we are looking for, since we are looking for the beautiful.
Hippias
But the appropriate, Socrates, makes things both be and appear beautiful by its presence.
Socrates
Is it impossible, then, for things which are really beautiful not to appear to be beautiful, at any rate when that is present which makes them appear so?
Hippias
It is impossible.
Socrates
Shall we, then, agree to this, Hippias, that all things which are really beautiful, both uses and pursuits, are always believed to be beautiful by all, and appear so to them, or, quite the contrary, that people are ignorant about them, and that there is more strife and contention about them than about anything else, both in private between individuals and in public between states?
Hippias
The latter rather, Socrates; that people are ignorant about them.
Socrates
They would not be so, if the appearance of beauty were added to them; and it would be added, if the appropriate were beautiful and made things not only to be beautiful, but also to appear so.
So that the appropriate, if it is that which makes things be beautiful, would be the beautiful which we are looking for, but would not be that which makes things appear beautiful; but if, on the other hand, the appropriate is that which makes things appear beautiful, it would not be the beautiful for which we are looking.
For that makes things be beautiful, but the same element could not make things both appear and be beautiful, nor could it make them both appear and be anything else whatsoever.
Let us choose, then, whether we think that the appropriate is that which makes things appear or be beautiful.
Hippias
That which makes them appear so, in my opinion, Socrates.
Socrates
Whew!
Our perception of what the beautiful is has fled away and gone, Hippias, since the appropriate has been found to be something other than the beautiful.
Hippias
Yes, by Zeus, Socrates, and to me that is very queer.
Socrates
However, my friend, let us not yet give it up, for I still have hopes that what the beautiful is will be made clear.
Hippias
Certainly, to be sure, Socrates, for it is not hard to find.
Now I know that if I should go away into solitude and meditate alone by myself, I could tell it to you with the most perfect accuracy.
Socrates
Ah, don't boast, Hippias.
You see how much trouble it has caused us already; I'm afraid it may get angry and run away more than ever.
And yet that is nonsense;
for you, I think, will easily find it when you go away by yourself.
But for Heaven's sake, find it in my presence, or, if you please, join me, as you are now doing, in looking for it.
And if we find it, that will be splendid, but if we do not, I shall, I suppose, accept my lot, and you will go away and find it easily.
And if we find it now, I shall certainly not be a nuisance to you by asking what that was which you found by yourself; but now once more see if this is in your opinion the beautiful :
I say, then, that it is but consider, paying close attention to me, that I may not talk nonsense for I say, then, whatever is useful shall be for us beautiful.
But I said it with this reason for my thought; beautiful eyes, we say, are not such as seem to be so, which are unable to see, but those which are able and useful for seeing.
Is that right?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
Then, too, in the same way we say that the whole body is beautiful, part of it for running, part for wrestling; and again all the animals, a beautiful horse or cock or quail and all utensils and land vehicles, and on the sea freight-ships and ships of war; and all instruments in music and in the other arts, and, if you like, customs and laws also pretty well all these we call beautiful in the same way looking at each of them how it is formed by nature, how it is wrought, how it has been enacted the useful we call beautiful, and beautiful in the way in which it is useful, and for the purpose for which it is useful, and at the time when it is useful; and that which is in all these aspects useless we say is ugly.
Now is not this your opinion also, Hippias?
Hippias
It is.
Socrates
Then are we right in saying that the useful rather than everything else is beautiful?
Hippias
We are right, surely, Socrates.
Socrates
Now that which has power to accomplish anything is useful for that for which it has power, but that which is powerless is useless, is it not?
Hippias
Certainly.
Socrates
Power, then, is beautiful, and want of power is disgraceful or ugly.
Hippias
Decidedly.
Now other things, Socrates, testify for us that this is so, but especially political affairs; for in political affairs and in one's own state to be powerful is the most beautiful of all things, but to be powerless is the most disgraceful of all.
Socrates
Good!
Then, for Heaven's sake, Hippias, is wisdom also for this reason the most beautiful of all things and ignorance the most disgraceful of all things?
Hippias
Well, what do you suppose, Socrates?
Socrates
Just keep quiet, my dear friend; I am so afraid and wondering what in the world we are saying again.
Hippias
What are you afraid of again, Socrates, since now your discussion has gone ahead most beautifully?
Socrates
I wish that might be the case; but consider this point with me: could a person do what he did not know how and was utterly powerless to do?
Hippias
By no means; for how could he do what he was powerless to do?
Socrates
Then those who commit errors and accomplish and do bad things involuntarily, if they were powerless to do those things, would not do them?
Hippias
Evidently not.
Socrates
But yet it is by power that those are powerful who are powerful for surely it is not by powerlessness.
Hippias
Certainly not.
Socrates
And all who do, have power to do what they do?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
Men do many more bad things than good, from childhood up, and commit many errors involuntarily.
Hippias
That is true.
Socrates
Well, then, this power and these useful things, which are useful for accomplishing something bad shall we say that they are beautiful, or far from it?
Hippias
Far from it, in my opinion, Socrates.
Socrates
Then, Hippias, the powerful and the useful are not, as it seems, our beautiful.
Hippias
They are, Socrates, if they are powerful and useful for good.
Socrates
Then that assertion, that the powerful and useful are beautiful without qualification, is gone; but was this, Hippias, what our soul wished to say, that the useful and the powerful for doing something good is the beautiful?
Hippias
Yes, in my opinion.
Socrates
But surely this is beneficial;
or is it not?
Hippias
Certainly.
Socrates
So by this argument the beautiful persons and beautiful customs and all that we mentioned just now are beautiful because they are beneficial.
Hippias
Evidently.
Socrates
Then the beneficial seems to us to be the beautiful, Hippias.
Hippias
Yes, certainly, Socrates.
Socrates
But the beneficial is that which creates good.
Hippias
Yes, it is.
Socrates
But that which creates is nothing else than the cause; am I right?
Hippias
It is so.
Socrates
Then the beautiful is the cause of the good.
Hippias
Yes, it is.
Socrates
But surely, Hippias, the cause and that of which the cause is the cause are different; for the cause could not well be the cause of the cause.
But look at it in this way was not the cause seen to be creating?
Hippias
Yes, certainly.
Socrates
By that which creates, then, only that is created which comes into being, but not that which creates.
Hippias
That is true.
Socrates
The cause, then, is not the cause of the cause, but of that which comes into being through it.
Hippias
Certainly.
Socrates
If, then, the beautiful is the cause of good, the good would come into being through the beautiful; and this is why we are eager for wisdom and all the other beautiful things, because their offspring, the good, is worthy of eagerness, and, from what we are finding, it looks as if the beautiful were a sort of father of the good.
Hippias
Certainly for what you say is well said, Socrates.
Socrates
Then is this well said, too, that the father is not the son, and the son not father?
Hippias
To be sure it is well said.
Socrates
And neither is the cause that which comes into being, nor is that which comes into being the cause.
Hippias
True.
Socrates
By Zeus, my good friend, then neither is the beautiful good, nor the good beautiful; or does it seem to you possible, after what has been said?
Hippias
No, by Zeus, it does not appear so to me.
Socrates
Does it please us, and should we be willing to say that the beautiful is not good, and the good not beautiful?
Hippias
No, by Zeus, it does not please me at all.
Socrates
Right, by Zeus, Hippias!
And it pleases me least of all the things we have said.
Hippias
Yes, that is likely.
Socrates
Then there is a good chance that the statement that the beneficial and the useful and the powerful to create something good are beautiful, is not, as it appeared to be, the most beautiful of of statements, but, if that be possible, is even more ridiculous than those first ones in which we thought the maiden was the beautiful, and each of the various other things we spoke of before.
Hippias
That is likely.
Socrates
And Hippias, I no longer know where to turn; I am at a loss; but have you anything to say?
Hippias
Not at the moment, but, as I said just now, I am sure I shall find it after meditation.
Socrates
But it seems to me that I am so eager to know that I cannot wait for you while you delay; for I believe I have just now found a way out.
Just see; how would it help us towards our goal if we were to say that that is beautiful which makes us feel joy; I do not mean all pleasures, but that which makes us feel joy through hearing and sight?
For surely beautiful human beings, Hippias, and all decorations and paintings and works of sculpture which are beautiful, delight us when we see them; and beautiful sounds and music in general and speeches and stories do the same thing, so that if we were to reply to that impudent fellow, "My excellent man, the beautiful is that which is pleasing through hearing and sight," don't you think that we should put a stop to his impudence?
Hippias
To me, at any rate, Socrates, it seems that the nature of the beautiful is now well stated.
Socrates
But what then?
Shall we say, Hippias, that beautiful customs and laws are beautiful because they are pleasing through hearing and sight, or that they have some other form of beauty?
Hippias
Perhaps, Socrates, these things might slip past the man unnoticed.
Socrates
No, by dog, Hippias not past the man before whom I should be most ashamed of talking nonsense and pretending that I was talking sense when I was not.
Hippias
What man is that?
Socrates
Socrates, the son of Sophroniscus, who would no more permit me to say these things carelessly without investigation than to say that I know what I do not know.
Hippias
But certainly I also, now that you have mentioned it, think that this about the laws is something different.
Socrates
Not too fast, Hippias; for very likely we have fallen into the same perplexity about the beautiful in which we were a while ago, although we think we have found another way out.
Hippias
What do you mean by that, Socrates?
Socrates
I will tell you what presents itself to me, if perhaps there may be some sense in it.
For perhaps these matters of laws and customs might be shown to be not outside of the perception which we have through hearing and sight; but let us stick to the statement that that which is pleasing through the senses is beautiful, without interjecting the matter of the laws.
But if this man of whom I speak, or anyone else whosoever, should ask us: "Hippias and Socrates, did you make the distinction that in the category of the pleasing that which is pleasing in the way you mention is beautiful, whereas you say that that which is pleasing according to the other senses those concerned with food and drink and sexual love and all such things is not beautiful?
Or do you say that such things are not even pleasing and that there is no pleasure at all in them, nor in anything else except sight and hearing?"
What shall we say, Hippias?
Hippias
Certainly, by all means, Socrates, we shall say that there are very great pleasures in the other things also.
Socrates
"Why, then," he will say, "if they are pleasures no less than the others, do you take from them this designation and deprive them of being beautiful?"
"Because," we shall say, "everybody would laugh at us if we should say that eating is not pleasant but is beautiful, and that a pleasant odor is not pleasant but is beautiful; and as to the act of sexual love, we should all, no doubt, contend that it is most pleasant, but that one must, if he perform it, do it so that no one else shall see, because it is most repulsive to see."
If we say this, Hippias, "I too understand," he will perhaps say, "that you have all along been ashamed to say that these pleasures are beautiful, because they do not seem so to people; but that is not what I asked, what seems to most people to be beautiful, but what is so."
We shall, then, I fancy, say, as we suggested, "We say that that part of the pleasant which comes by sight and hearing is beautiful."
Do you think the statement is of any use, Hippias, or shall we say something else?
Hippias
Inevitably, in view of what has been said, Socrates, we must say just that.
Socrates
"Excellent!"
he will say.
"Then if that which is pleasant through sight and hearing is beautiful, that among pleasant things which does not happen to be of that sort would evidently not be beautiful?"
Shall we agree?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
"Is, then, that which is pleasant through sight," he will say, "pleasant through sight and hearing, or is that which is pleasant through hearing pleasant through hearing and sight?"
"No," we shall say, "that which is pleasant through each of these would not in the least be pleasant through both for that is what you appear to us to mean but we said that either of these pleasant things would be beautiful alone by itself, and both together."
Is not that the reply we shall make?
Hippias
Certainly.
Socrates
"Does, then," he will say, "any pleasant thing whatsoever differ from any pleasant thing whatsoever by this, by being pleasant?
I ask not whether any pleasure is greater or smaller or more or less, but whether it differs by just this very thing, by the fact that one of the pleasures is a pleasure and the other is not a pleasure."
"We do not think so."
Do we?
Hippias
No, we do not.
Socrates
"Is it not," then, he will say, "for some other reason than because they are pleasures that you chose these pleasures out from the other pleasures it was because you saw some quality in both, since they have something different from the others, in view of which you say that they are beautiful?
For the reason why that which is pleasant through sight is beautiful, is not, I imagine, because it is through sight; for if that were the cause of its being beautiful, the other pleasure, that through hearing, would not be beautiful; it certainly is not pleasure through sight."
Shall we say "What you say is true?"
Hippias
Yes, we shall.
Socrates
"Nor, again, is the pleasure through hearing beautiful for the reason that it is through hearing; for in that case, again, the pleasure through sight would not be beautiful; it certainly is not pleasure through hearing."
Shall we say, Hippias, that the man who says that speaks the truth?
Hippias
Yes, he speaks the truth.
Socrates
"But yet both are beautiful, as you say."
Hippias
We do.
Socrates
"They have, then, something identical which makes them to be beautiful, this common quality which pertains to both of them in common and to each individually; for otherwise they would not both collectively and each individually be beautiful."
Answer me, as if you were answering him.
Hippias
I answer, and I think it is as you say.
Socrates
If, then, these pleasures are both affected in any way collectively, but each individually is not so affected, it is not by this affection that they would be beautiful.
Hippias
And how could that be, Socrates, when neither of them individually is affected by some affection or other, that then both are affected by that affection by which neither is affected?
Socrates
You think it cannot be?
Hippias
I should have to be very inexperienced both in the nature of these things and in the language of our present discussion.
Socrates
Very pretty, Hippias.
But there is a chance that I think I see a case of that kind which you say is impossible, but do not really see it.
Hippias
There's no chance about it, Socrates, but you quite purposely see wrongly.
Socrates
And certainly many such cases appear before my mind, but I mistrust them because they do not appear to you, a man who has made more money by wisdom than anyone now living, but to me who never made any money at all;
and the thought disturbs me, friend, that you are playing with me and purposely deceiving me, they appear to me in such numbers and with such force.
Hippias
Nobody, Socrates, will know better than you whether I am playing with you or not, if you proceed to tell these things that appear to you; for it will be apparent to you that you are talking nonsense.
For you will never find that you and I are both affected by an affection by which neither of us is affected.
Socrates
What are you saying, Hippias?
Perhaps you are talking sense, and I fail to understand; but let me tell more clearly what I wish to say.
For it appears to me that it is possible for us both to be so affected as to be something which I am not so affected as to be, and which I am not and you are not either; and again for neither of us to be so affected as to be other things which we both are.
Hippias
Your reply, Socrates, seems to involve miracles again even greater than those of your previous reply.
For consider: if we are both just, would not each of us be just also, and if each is unjust, would not both again also be unjust, or if both are healthy, each of us also?
Or if each of us were to be tired or wounded or struck or affected in any other way whatsoever, should we not both of us be affected in the same way?
Then, too, if we were to be golden or of silver or of ivory, or, if you please, noble or wise or honored or old or young or whatever else you like of all that flesh is heir to, is it not quite inevitable that each of us be that also?
Socrates
Absolutely.
Hippias
But you see, Socrates, you do not consider the entirety of things, nor do they with whom you are in the habit of conversing, but you all test the beautiful and each individual entity by taking them separately and cutting them to pieces.
For this reason you fail to observe that embodiments of reality are by nature so great and undivided.
And now you have failed to observe to such a degree that you think there is some affection or reality which pertains to both of these together, but not to each individually, or again to each, but not to both; so unreasoning and undiscerning and foolish and unreflecting is your state of mind.
Socrates
Human affairs, Hippias, are not what a man wishes, but what he can, as the proverb goes which people are constantly citing; but you are always aiding us with admonitions.
For now too, until we were admonished by you of our foolish state of mind shall I continue to speak and make you a still further exhibition of our thoughts on the subject, or shall I not speak?
Hippias
You will speak to one who knows, Socrates, for I know the state of mind of all who are concerned with discussions;
but nevertheless, if you prefer, speak.
Socrates
Well, I do prefer.
For we, my friend, were so stupid, before you spoke, as to have an opinion concerning you and me, that each of us was one, but that we were not both that which each of us was for we are not one, but two so foolish were we.
But now we have been taught by you that if we are both two, then each of us is inevitably two, and if each is one, then both are inevitably one;
for it is impossible, by the continuous doctrine of reality according to Hippias, that it be otherwise, but what we both are, that each is, and what each is, both are.
So now I have been convinced by you, and I hold this position.
But first, Hippias, refresh my memory: Are you and I one, or are you two and I two?
Hippias
What do you mean, Socrates?
Socrates
Just what I say; for I am afraid to speak plainly to you, because you are vexed with me, when you think you are talking sensibly;
however, tell me further: Is not each of us one and affected in such a way as to be one?
Hippias
Certainly.
Socrates
Then each of us, if one, would be an odd number; or do you not consider one an odd number?
Hippias
I do.
Socrates
Then are we both an odd number, being two?
Hippias
That could not be, Socrates.
Socrates
But we are both an even number, are we not?
Hippias
Certainly.
Socrates
Then because we are both even, is each of us on that account even?
Hippias
No, surely not.
Socrates
Then it is not absolutely inevitable, as you said just now, that what both are, each is, and what each is, both are.
Hippias
Not things of this sort, but such as I mentioned before.
Socrates
That suffices, Hippias; for even this is welcome, since it appears that some things are so and some are not so.
For I said, if you remember the beginning of this discussion, that pleasure through sight and through hearing were beautiful, not by that by which each of them was so affected as to be beautiful, but not both, nor both but not each, but by that by which both and each were so affected, because you conceded that both and each were beautiful.
For this reason I thought that if both are beautiful they must be beautiful by that essence which belongs to both, but not by that which is lacking in each; and I still think so.
But tell me, as in the beginning: If pleasure through sight and pleasure through hearing are both and each beautiful, does not that which makes them beautiful belong to both and to each?
Hippias
Certainly.
Socrates
Is it, then, for this reason, because each is a pleasure and both are pleasures, that they would be beautiful?
Or would all other pleasures be for this reason no less beautiful than they?
For we saw, if you remember, that they were no less pleasures.
Hippias
Yes, I remember.
Socrates
But for this reason, because these pleasures were through sight and hearing, it was said that they are beautiful.
Hippias
Yes, that is what was said.
Socrates
See if what I say is true.
For it was said, if my memory serves me, that this "pleasant" was beautiful, not all "pleasant," but that which is through sight and hearing.
Hippias
True.
Socrates
Now this quality belongs to both, but not to each, does it not?
For surely each of them, as was said before, is not through both senses, but both are through both, and each is not.
Is that true?
Hippias
It is.
Socrates
Then it is not by that which does not belong to each that each of them is beautiful; for "both" does not belong to each; so that it is possible, according to our hypothesis, to say that they both are beautiful, but not to say that each is so; or what shall we say?
Is that not inevitable?
Hippias
It appears so.
Socrates
Shall we say, then, that both are beautiful, but that each is not?
Hippias
What is to prevent?
Socrates
This seems to me, my friend, to prevent, that there were some attributes thus belonging to individual things, which belonged, we thought, to each, if they belonged to both, and to both, if they belonged to each I mean all those attributes which you specified.
Am I right?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
But those again which I specified did not; and among those were precisely "each" and "both."
Is that so?
Hippias
It is.
Socrates
To which group, then, Hippias, does the beautiful seem to you to belong?
To the group of those that you mentioned?
If I am strong and you also, are we both collectively strong, and if I am just and you also, are we both collectively just, and if both collectively, then each individually so, too, if I am beautiful and you also, are we both collectively beautiful, and if both collectively, then each individually?
Or is there nothing to prevent this, as in the case that when given things are both collectively even, they may perhaps individually be odd, or perhaps even, and again, when things are individually irrational quantities they may perhaps both collectively be rational, or perhaps irrational, and countless other cases which, you know, I said appeared before my mind?
To which group do you assign the beautiful?
Or have you the same view about it as I?
For to me it seems great foolishness that we collectively are beautiful, but each of us is not so, or that each of us is so, but both are not, or anything else of that sort.
Do you choose in this way, as I do, or in some other way?
Hippias
In this way, Socrates.
Socrates
You choose well, Hippias, that we may be free from the need of further search; for if the beautiful is in this group, that which is pleasing through sight and hearing would no longer be the beautiful.
For the expression through sight and hearing makes both collectively beautiful, but not each individually; and this was impossible, as you and I agree.
Hippias
Yes, we agree.
Socrates
It is, then, impossible that the pleasant through sight and hearing be the beautiful, since in becoming beautiful it offers an impossibility.
Hippias
That is true.
Socrates
"Then tell us again," he will say, "from the beginning, since you failed this time; what do you say that this 'beautiful,' belonging to both the pleasures, is, on account of which you honored them before the rest and called them beautiful?"
It seems to me, Hippias, inevitable that we say that these are the most harmless and the best of pleasures, both of them collectively and each of them individually; or have you anything else to suggest, by which they excel the rest?
Hippias
Not at all; for really they are the best.
Socrates
"This, then," he will say, "you say is the beautiful, beneficial pleasure?"
"It seems that we do," I shall say; and you?
Hippias
I also.
Socrates
"Well, then," he will say, "beneficial is that which creates the good, but that which creates and that which is created were just now seen to be different, and our argument has come round to the earlier argument, has it not?
For neither could the good be beautiful nor the beautiful good, if each of them is different from the other."
"Absolutely true," we shall say, if we are reasonable; for it is inadmissible to disagree with him who says what is right.
Hippias
But now, Socrates, what do you think all this amounts to?
It is mere scrapings and shavings of discourse, as I said a while ago, divided into bits; but that other ability is beautiful and of great worth, the ability to produce a discourse well and beautifully in a court of law or a council-house or before any other public body before which the discourse may be delivered, to convince the audience and to carry off, not the smallest, but the greatest of prizes, the salvation of oneself, one's property, and one's friends.
For these things, therefore, one must strive, renouncing these petty arguments, that one may not, by busying oneself, as at present, with mere talk and nonsense, appear to be a fool.
Socrates
My dear Hippias, you are blessed because you know the things a man ought to practise, and have, as you say, practised them satisfactorily.
But I, as it seems, am possessed by some accursed fortune, so that I am always wandering and perplexed, and, exhibiting my perplexity to you wise men, am in turn reviled by you in speech whenever I exhibit it.
For you say of me, what you are now saying, that I busy myself with silly little matters of no account;
but when in turn I am convinced by you and say what you say, that it is by far the best thing to be able to produce a discourse well and beautifully and gain one's end in a court of law or in any other assemblage, I am called everything that is bad by some other men here and especially by that man who is continually refuting me;
for he is a very near relative of mine and lives in the same house.
So whenever I go home to my own house, and he hears me saying these things, he asks me if I am not ashamed that I have the face to talk about beautiful practices, when it is so plainly shown, to my confusion, that I do not even know what the beautiful itself is.
"And yet how are you to know," he will say, "either who produced a discourse, or anything else whatsoever, beautifully, or not, when you are ignorant of the beautiful?
And when you are in such a condition, do you think it is better for you to be alive than dead?"
So it has come about, as I say, that I am abused and reviled by you and by him.
But perhaps it is necessary to endure all this, for it is quite reasonable that I might be benefited by it.
So I think, Hippias, that I have been benefited by conversation with both of you; for I think I know the meaning of the proverb "beautiful things are difficult."
Athenian
To a god or to some man do you ascribe the authorship of your legal arrangements, Strangers?
Clinias
To a god, Stranger, most rightfully to a god.
We call Zeus our lawgiver; while in Lacedaemon, where our friend here has his home, I believe they claim Apollo as theirs.
Is not that so?
Megillus
Yes.
Athenian
Do you then, like Homer, say that Minos used to go every ninth year to hold converse with his father Zeus, and that he was guided by his divine oracles in laying down the laws for your cities?
Clinias
So our people say.
And they say also that his brother Rhadamanthys, no doubt you have heard the name, was exceedingly just.
And certainly the Cretans would maintain that he won this title owing to his righteous administration of justice in those days.
Athenian
Yes, his renown is indeed glorious and well befitting a son of Zeus.
And, since you and our friend Megillus were both brought up in legal institutions of so noble a kind, you would, I imagine, have no aversion to our occupying ourselves as we go along in discussion on the subject of government and laws.
Certainly, as I am told, the road from Cnosus to the cave and temple of Zeus is a long one, and we are sure to find, in this sultry weather, shady resting-places among the high trees along the road: in them we can rest ofttimes, as befits our age, beguiling the time with discourse, and thus complete our journey in comfort.
Clinias
True, Stranger; and as one proceeds further one finds in the groves cypress-trees of wonderful height and beauty, and meadows too, where we may rest ourselves and talk.
Athenian
You say well.
Clinias
Yes, indeed: and when we set eyes on them we shall say so still more emphatically.
So let us be going, and good luck attend us.
Athenian
Amen!
And tell me now, for what reason did your law ordain the common meals you have, and your gymnastic schools and military equipment?
Clinias
Our customs, Stranger, are, as I think, such as anyone may grasp easily.
As you may notice, Crete, as a whole, is not a level country, like Thessaly: consequently, whereas the Thessalians mostly go on horseback, we Cretans are runners, since this land of ours is rugged and more suitable for the practice of foot-running.
Under these conditions we are obliged to have light armour for running and to avoid heavy equipment; so bows and arrows are adopted as suitable because of their lightness.
Thus all these customs of ours are adapted for war, and, in my opinion, this was the object which the lawgiver had in view when he ordained them all.
Probably this was his reason also for instituting common meals: he saw how soldiers, all the time they are on campaign, are obliged by force of circumstances to mess in common, for the sake of their own security.
And herein, as I think, he condemned the stupidity of the mass of men in failing to perceive that all are involved ceaselessly in a lifelong war against all States.
If, then, these practices are necessary in war, namely, messing in common for safety's sake, and the appointment of relays of officers and privates to act as guards, they must be carried out equally in time of peace.
For (as he would say) "peace," as the term is commonly employed, is nothing more than a name, the truth being that every State is, by a law of nature, engaged perpetually in an informal war with every other State.
And if you look at the matter from this point of view you will find it practically true that our Cretan lawgiver ordained all our legal usages, both public and private, with an eye to war, and that he therefore charged us with the task of guarding our laws safely, in the conviction that without victory in war nothing else, whether possession or institution, is of the least value, but all the goods of the vanquished fall into the hands of the victors.
Athenian
Your training, Stranger, has certainly, as it seems to me, given you an excellent understanding of the legal practices of Crete.
But tell me this more clearly still: by the definition you have given of the well-constituted State you appear to me to imply that it ought to be organized in such a way as to be victorious in war over all other States.
Is that so?
Clinias
Certainly it is; and I think that our friend here shares my opinion.
Megillus
No Lacedaemonian, my good sir, could possibly say otherwise.
Athenian
If this, then, is the right attitude for a State to adopt towards a State, is the right attitude for village towards village different?
Clinias
By no means.
Athenian
It is the same, you say?
Clinias
Yes.
Athenian
Well then, is the same attitude right also for one house in the village towards another, and for each man towards every other?
Clinias
It is.
Athenian
And must each individual man regard himself as his own enemy?
Or what do we say when we come to this point?
Clinias
O Stranger of Athens, for I should be loth to call you a man of Attica, since methinks you deserve rather to be named after the goddess Athena, seeing that you have made the argument more clear by taking it back again to its starting-point; whereby you will the more easily discover the justice of our recent statement that, in the mass, all men are both publicly and privately the enemies of all, and individually also each man is his own enemy.
Athenian
What is your meaning, my admirable sir?
Clinias
It is just in this war, my friend, that the victory over self is of all victories the first and best while self-defeat is of all defeats at once the worst and the most shameful.
For these phrases signify that a war against self exists within each of us.
Athenian
Now let us take the argument back in the reverse direction.
Seeing that individually each of us is partly superior to himself and partly inferior, are we to affirm that the same condition of things exists in house and village and State, or are we to deny it?
Clinias
Do you mean the condition of being partly self-superior and partly self-inferior?
Athenian
Yes.
Clinias
That, too, is a proper question; for such a condition does most certainly exist, and in States above all.
Every State in which the better class is victorious over the populace and the lower classes would rightly be termed "self-superior," and would be praised most justly for a victory of this kind; and conversely, when the reverse is the case.
Athenian
Well then, leaving aside the question as to whether the worse element is ever superior to the better (a question which would demand a more lengthy discussion), what you assert, as I now perceive, is this, that sometimes citizens of one stock and of one State who are unjust and numerous may combine together and try to enslave by force those who are just but fewer in number, and wherever they prevail such a State would rightly be termed "self-inferior" and bad, but "self-superior" and good wherever they are worsted.
Clinias
This statement is indeed most extraordinary, Stranger; none the less we cannot possibly reject it.
Athenian
Stay a moment:
here too is a case we must further consider.
Suppose there were a number of brothers, all sons of the same parents, it would not be at all surprising if most of them were unjust and but few just.
Clinias
It would not.
Athenian
And, moreover, it would ill beseem you and me to go a-chasing after this form of expression, that if the bad ones conquered the whole of this family and house should be called "self-inferior," but "self-superior" if they were defeated; for our present reference to the usage of ordinary speech is not concerned with the propriety or impropriety of verbal phrases but with the essential rightness or wrongness of laws.
Clinias
Very true, Stranger.
Megillus
And finely spoken, too, up to this point, as I agree.
Athenian
Let us also look at this point: the brothers we have just described would have, I suppose, a judge?
Clinias
Certainly.
Athenian
Which of the two would be the better a judge who destroyed all the wicked among them and charged the good to govern themselves, or one who made the good members govern and, while allowing the bad to live, made them submit willingly to be governed?
And there is a third judge we must mention (third and best in point of merit), if indeed such a judge can be found, who in dealing with a single divided family will destroy none of them but reconcile them and succeed, by enacting laws for them, in securing amongst them thenceforward permanent friendliness.
Clinias
A judge and lawgiver of that kind would be by far the best.
Athenian
But mark this: his aim, in the laws he enacted for them, would be the opposite of war.
Clinias
That is true.
Athenian
And what of him who brings the State into harmony?
In ordering its life would he have regard to external warfare rather than to the internal war, whenever it occurs, which goes by the name of "civil" strife?
For this is a war as to which it would be the desire of every man that, if possible, it should never occur in his own State, and that, if it did occur, it should come to as speedy an end as possible.
Clinias
Evidently he would have regard to civil war.
Athenian
And would anyone prefer that the citizens should be obliged to devote their attention to external enemies after internal concord had been secured by the destruction of one section and the victory of their opponents rather than after the establishment of friendship and peace by terms of conciliation?
Clinias
Everyone would prefer the latter alternative for his own State rather than the former.
Athenian
And would not the lawgiver do the same?
Clinias
Of course.
Athenian
Would not every lawgiver in all his legislation aim at the highest good?
Clinias
Assuredly.
Athenian
The highest good, however, is neither war nor civil strife which things we should pray rather to be saved from but peace one with another and friendly feeling.
Moreover, it would seem that the victory we mentioned of a State over itself is not one of the best things but one of those which are necessary.
For imagine a man supposing that a human body was best off when it was sick and aged with physic, while never giving a thought to the case of the body that needs no physic at all!
Similarly, with regard to the well-being of a State or an individual, that man will never make genuine statesman who pays attention primarily solely to the needs of foreign warfare, nor will he make a finished lawgiver unless he designs his legislation for peace rather than his peace legislation for war.
Clinias
This statement, Stranger, is apparently true; yet, unless I am much mistaken, our legal usages in Crete, and in Lacedaemon too, are wholly acted towards war.
Megillus
I certainly am.
Clinias
And I can assure you they have reached us also, shipped over from Lacedaemon.
Athenian
Come now, let us jointly interrogate this poet somehow on this wise:
"O Tyrtaeus, most inspired of poets (for assuredly you seem to us both wise and good in that you have eulogized excellently those who excel in war), concerning this matter we three Megillus, Clinias of Cnosus and myself are already in entire accord with you, as we suppose; but we wish to be assured that both we and you are alluding to the same persons.
Tell us then: do you clearly recognize, as we do, two distinct kinds of war?"
In reply to this I suppose that even a much less able man than Tyrtaeus would state the truth, that there are two kinds, the one being that which we all call "civil," which is of all wars the most bitter, as we said just now, while the other kind, as I suppose we shall all agree, is that which we engage in when we quarrel with foreigners and aliens a kind much milder than the former.
Clinias
Certainly.
Athenian
Come, then, which kind of warriors, fighting in which kind of war, did you praise so highly, while blaming others?
Warriors, apparently, who fight in war abroad.
At any rate, in your poems you have said that you cannot abide men who dare not ""face the gory fray""Tyrtaeus"and smite the foe in close combat."
Then we should proceed to say, "It appears, O Tyrtaeus, that you are chiefly praising those who achieve distinction in foreign and external warfare."
To this, I presume, he would agree, and say "Yes"?
Clinias
Of course.
Athenian
Yet, brave though these men are, we still maintain that they are far surpassed in bravery by those who are conspicuously brave in the greatest of wars;
and we also have a poet for witness, Theognis (a citizen of Sicilian Megara), who says: "In the day of grievous feud, O Cyrnus, the loyal warrior is worth his weight in silver and gold."
Such a man, in a war much more grievous, is, we say, ever so much better than the other nearly as much better, in fact, as the union of justice, prudence and wisdom with courage is better than courage by itself alone.
For a man would never prove himself a loyal and sound in civil war if devoid of goodness in its entirety; whereas in the war of which Tyrtaeus speaks there are vast numbers of mercenaries ready to die fighting "with well-planted feet apart," of whom the majority, with but few exceptions, prove themselves reckless, unjust, violent, and pre-eminently foolish.
What, then, is the conclusion to which our present discourse is tending, and what point is it trying to make clear by these statements?
Plainly it is this: both the Heaven-taught legislator of Crete and every legislator who is worth his salt will most assuredly legislate always with a single eye to the highest goodness and to that alone; and this (to quote Theognis) consists in "loyalty in danger," and one might term it "complete righteousness."
But that goodness which Tyrtaeus specially praised, fair though it be and fitly glorified by the poet, deserves nevertheless to be placed no higher than fourth in order and estimation.
Clinias
We are degrading our own lawgiver, Stranger, to a very low level!
Athenian
Nay, my good Sir, it is ourselves we are degrading, in so far as we imagine that it was with a special view to war that Lycurgus and Minos laid down all the legal usages here and in Lacedaemon.
Clinias
How, then, ought we to have stated the matter?
Athenian
In the way that is, as I think, true and proper when talking of a divine hero.
That is to say, we should state that he enacted laws with an eye not to some one fraction, and that the most paltry, of goodness, but to goodness as a whole, and that he devised the laws themselves according to classes, though not the classes which the present devisers propound.
For everyone now brings forward and devises just the class which he needs:
one man deals with inheritances and heiresses, another with cases of battery, and so on in endless variety.
But what we assert is that the devising of laws, when rightly conducted, follows the procedure which we have now commenced.
Indeed, I greatly admire the way you opened your exposition of the laws;
for to make a start with goodness and say that that was the aim of the lawgiver is the right way.
But in your further statement that he legislated wholly with reference to a fraction of goodness, and that the smallest fraction, you seemed to me to be in error, and all this latter part of my discourse was because of that.
What then is the manner of exposition I should have liked to have heard from you?
Shall I tell you?
Clinias
Yes, by all means.
Athenian
"O Stranger" (thus you ought to have said), "it is not for nothing that the laws of the Cretans are held in superlatively high repute among all the Hellenes.
For they are true laws inasmuch as they effect the well-being of those who use them by supplying all that are good.
Now goods are of two kinds, human and divine;
and the human goods are dependent on the divine, and he who receives the greater acquires also the less, or else he is bereft of both.
The lesser goods are those of which health ranks first, beauty second; the third is strength, in running and all other bodily exercises; and the fourth is wealth not blind but sharp, provided that he has wisdom for companion.
And wisdom, in turn, has first place among the goods that are divine, and rational temperance of soul comes second; from these two, when united with courage, there issues justice, as the third; and the fourth is courage.
Now all these are by nature ranked before the human goods, and verily the law-giver also must so rank them.
Next, it must be proclaimed to the citizens that all the other instructions they receive have these in view; and that, of these goods themselves, the human look up to the divine, and the divine to reason as their chief.
And in regard to their marriage connections, and to their subsequent breeding and rearing of children, male and female, both during youth and in later life up to old age, the lawgiver must supervise the citizens, duly apportioning honor and dishonor; and in regard to all their forms of intercourse he must observe and watch their pains and pleasures and desires and all intense passions, and distribute praise and blame correctly by the means of the laws themselves.
Moreover, in the matter of anger and of fear, and of all the disturbances which befall souls owing to misfortune, and of all the avoidances thereof which occur in good-fortune, and of all the experiences which confront men through disease or war or penury or their opposites, in regard to all these definite instruction must be given as to what is the right and what the wrong disposition in each case.
It is necessary, in the next place, for the law-giver to keep a watch on the methods employed by the citizens in gaining and spending money,
and to supervise the associations they form with one another, and the dissolutions thereof, whether they be voluntary or under compulsion; he must observe the manner in which they conduct each of these mutual transactions, and note where justice obtains and where it is lacking.
To those that are obedient he must assign honors by law, but on the disobedient he must impose duly appointed penalties.
Then finally, when he arrives at the completion of the whole constitution, he has to consider in what manner in each case the burial of the dead should be carried out, and what honors should be assigned to them.
This being settled, the framer of the laws will hand over all his statutes to the charge of Wardens guided some by wisdom, others by true opinion to the end that Reason, having bound all into one single system, may declare them to be ancillary neither to wealth nor ambition, but to temperance and justice."
In this manner, Strangers, I could have wished (and I wish it still) that you had fully explained how all these regulations are inherent in the reputed laws of Zeus and in those of the Pythian Apollo which were ordained by Minos and Lycurgus, and how their systematic arrangement is quite evident to him who, whether by art or practice, is an expert in law, although it is by no means obvious to the rest of us.
Clinias
What then, Stranger, should be the next step in our argument?
Athenian
We ought, as I think, to do as we did at first start from the beginning to explain first the institutions which have to do with courage; and after that we shall, if you wish, deal with a second and a third form of goodness.
And as soon as we have completed our treatment of the first theme, we shall take that as our model and by a discussion of the rest on similar lines beguile the way; and at the end of our treatment of goodness in all its forms we shall make it clear, if God will, that the rules we discussed just now had goodness for their aim.
Megillus
A good suggestion!
And begin with our friend here, the panegyrist of Zeus try first to put him to the test.
Athenian
Try I will, and to test you too and myself; for the argument concerns us all alike.
Tell me then: do we assert that the common meals and the gymnasia were devised by the lawgiver with a view to war?
Megillus
Yes.
Athenian
And is there a third institution of the kind, and a fourth?
For probably one ought to employ this method of enumeration also in dealing with the subdivisions (or whatever we ought to call them) of the other forms of goodness, if only one makes one's meaning clear.
Megillus
The third thing he devised was hunting: so I and every Lacedaemonian would say.
Athenian
Let us attempt also to state what comes fourth, and fifth too, if possible.
Megillus
The fourth also I may attempt to state: it is the training, widely prevalent amongst us, in hardy endurance of pain, by means both of manual contests and of robberies carried out every time at the risk of a sound drubbing;
moreover, the "Crypteia," as it is called, affords a wonderfully severe training in hardihood, as the men go bare-foot in winter and sleep without coverlets and have no attendants, but wait on themselves and rove through the whole countryside both by night and by day.
Moreover in our games, we have severe tests of endurance, when men unclad do battle with the violence of the heat, and there are other instances so numerous that the recital of them would be well-nigh endless.
Athenian
Splendid, O Stranger of Lacedaemon!
But come now, as to courage, how shall we define it?
Shall we define it quite simply as battling against fears and pains only, or as against desires also and pleasures, with their dangerous enticements and flatteries, which melt men's hearts like wax even men most reverenced in their own conceit.
Megillus
The latter definition is, I think, the right one: courage is battling against them all.
Theaetetus
Eucleides
Terpsion
Socrates
Theodorus
Theaetetus
Eucleides
Just in from the country, Terpsion, or did you come some time ago?
Terpsion
Quite a while ago;
and I was looking for you in the market-place and wondering that I could not find you.
Eucleides
Well, you see, I was not in the city.
Terpsion
Where then?
Eucleides
As I was going down to the harbor I met Theaetetus being carried to Athens from the camp at Corinth.
Terpsion
Alive or dead?
Eucleides
Just barely alive; for he is suffering severely from wounds, and, worse than that, he has been taken with the sickness that has broken out in the army.
Terpsion
You mean the dysentery?
Eucleides
Yes.
Terpsion
What a man he is who you say is in danger!
Eucleides
A noble man, Terpsion, and indeed just now I heard some people praising him highly for his conduct in the battle.
Terpsion
That is not at all strange; it would have been much more remarkable if he had not so conducted himself.
But why did he not stop here in Megara?
Eucleides
He was in a hurry to get home; for I begged and advised him to stop, but he would not.
So I went along with him, and as I was coming back I thought of Socrates and wondered at his prophetic gift, especially in what he said about him.
For I think he met him a little before his own death, when Theaetetus was a mere boy, and as a result of acquaintance and conversation with him, he greatly admired his qualities.
When I went to Athens he related to me the conversation he had with him, which was well worth hearing, and he said he would surely become a notable man if he lived.
Terpsion
And he was right, apparently.
But what was the talk?
Could you relate it?
Eucleides
No, by Zeus, at least not offhand.
But I made notes at the time as soon as I reached home, then afterwards at my leisure, as I recalled things, I wrote them down, and whenever I went to Athens I used to ask Socrates about what I could not remember, and then I came here and made corrections; so that I have pretty much the whole talk written down.
Terpsion
That is true.
I heard you say so before; and really I have been waiting about here all along intending to ask you to show it to me.
What hinders us from reading it now?
Certainly I need to rest, since I have come from the country.
Eucleides
And I myself went with Theaetetus as far as Erineum, so I also should not be sorry to take a rest.
Come, let us go, and while we are resting, the boy shall read to us.
Terpsion
Very well.
Eucleides
Here is the book, Terpsion.
Now this is the way I wrote the conversation: I did not represent Socrates relating it to me, as he did, but conversing with those with whom he told me he conversed.
And he told me they were the geometrician Theodorus and Theaetetus.
Now in order that the explanatory words between the speeches might not be annoying in the written account, such as "and I said" or "and I remarked," whenever Socrates spoke, or "he agreed or he did not agree," in the case of the interlocutor, I omitted all that sort of thing and represented Socrates himself as talking with them.
Terpsion
That is quite fitting, Eucleides.
Eucleides
Come, boy, take the book and read.
Socrates
If I cared more for Cyrene and its affairs, Theodorus, I should ask you about things there and about the people, whether any of the young men there are devoting themselves to geometry or any other form of philosophy; but as it is, since I care less for those people than for the people here, I am more eager to know which of our own young men are likely to gain reputation.
These are the things I myself investigate, so far as I can, and about which I question those others with whom I see that the young men like to associate.
Now a great many of them come to you, and rightly, for you deserve it on account of your geometry, not to speak of other reasons.
So if you have met with any young man who is worth mentioning, I should like to hear about him.
Theodorus
Truly, Socrates, it is well worth while for me to talk and for you to hear about a splendid young fellow, one of your fellow-citizens, whom I have met.
Now if he were handsome, I should be very much afraid to speak, lest someone should think I was in love with him.
But the fact is now don't be angry with me he is not handsome, but is like you in his snub nose and protruding eyes, only those features are less marked in him than in you.
You see I speak fearlessly.
But I assure you that among all the young men I have ever met and I have had to do with a great many I never yet found one of such marvelously fine qualities.
He is quick to learn, beyond almost anyone else, yet exceptionally gentle, and moreover brave beyond any other; I should not have supposed such a combination existed, and I do not see it elsewhere.
On the contrary, those who, like him, have quick, sharp minds and good memories, have usually also quick tempers; they dart off and are swept away, like ships without ballast; they are excitable rather than courageous; those, on the other hand, who are steadier are somewhat dull when brought face to face with learning, and are very forgetful.
But this boy advances toward learning and investigation smoothly and surely and successfully, with perfect gentleness, like a stream of oil that flows without a sound, so that one marvels how he accomplishes all this at his age.
Socrates
That is good news;
but which of our citizens is his father?
Theodorus
I have heard the name, but do not remember it.
However, it does not matter, for the youth is the middle one of those who are now coming toward us.
He and those friends of his were anointing themselves in the outer course, and now they seem to have finished and to be coming here.
See if you recognize him.
Socrates
I know him.
He is the son of Euphronius of Sunium, who is a man of just the sort you describe, and of good repute in other respects; moreover he left a very large property.
But the youth's name I do not know.
Theodorus
Theaetetus is his name, Socrates; but I believe the property was squandered by trustees.
Nevertheless, Socrates, he is remarkably liberal with his money, too.
Socrates
It is a noble man that you describe.
Now please tell him to come here and sit by us.
Theodorus
I will.
Theaetetus, come here to Socrates.
Socrates
Yes, do so, Theaetetus, that I may look at myself and see what sort of a face I have; for Theodorus says it is like yours.
Now if we each had a lyre, and he said we had tuned them to the same key, should we take his word for it without more ado, or should we inquire first whether he who said it was a musician?
Theaetetus
We should inquire.
Socrates
Then if we found that he was a musician, we should believe him, but if not, we should refuse to take his word?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
But now, if we are concerned about the likeness of our faces, we must consider whether he who speaks is a painter, or not.
Theaetetus
I think we must.
Socrates
Well, is Theodorus a painter?
Theaetetus
Not so far as I know.
Socrates
Nor a geometrician, either?
Theaetetus
Oh yes, decidedly, Socrates.
Socrates
And an astronomer, and an arithmetician, and a musician, and in general an educated man?
Theaetetus
I think so.
Socrates
Well then, if he says, either in praise or blame, that we have some physical resemblance, it is not especially worth while to pay attention to him.
Theaetetus
Perhaps not.
Socrates
But what if he should praise the soul of one of us for virtue and wisdom?
Is it not worth while for the one who hears to examine eagerly the one who is praised, and for that one to exhibit his qualities with eagerness?
Theaetetus
Certainly, Socrates.
Socrates
Then, my dear Theaetetus, this is just the time for you to exhibit your qualities and for me to examine them; for I assure you that Theodorus, though he has praised many foreigners and citizens to me, never praised anyone as he praised you just now.
Theaetetus
A good idea, Socrates; but make sure that he was not speaking in jest.
Socrates
That is not Theodorus's way.
But do not seek to draw back from your agreement on the pretext that he is jesting, or he will be forced to testify under oath; for certainly no one will accuse him of perjury.
Come, be courageous and hold to the agreement.
Theaetetus
I suppose I must, if you say so.
Socrates
Now tell me; I suppose you learn some geometry from Theodorus?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
And astronomy and harmony and arithmetic?
Theaetetus
I try hard to do so.
Socrates
And so do I, my boy, from him and from any others who I think know anything about these things.
But nevertheless, although in other respects I get on fairly well in them, yet I am in doubt about one little matter, which should be investigated with your help and that of these others.
Tell me, is not learning growing wiser about that which one learns?
Theaetetus
Of course.
Socrates
And the wise, I suppose, are wise by wisdom.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
And does this differ at all from knowledge?
Theaetetus
Does what differ?
Socrates
Wisdom.
Or are not people wise in that of which they have knowledge?
Theaetetus
Of course.
Socrates
Then knowledge and wisdom are the same thing?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
Well, it is just this that I am in doubt about and cannot fully grasp by my own efforts what knowledge really is.
Can we tell that?
What do you say?
Who of us will speak first?
And he who fails, and whoever fails in turn, shall go and sit down and be donkey, as the children say when they play ball; and whoever gets through without failing shall be our king and shall order us to answer any questions he pleases.
Why are you silent?
I hope, Theodorus, I am not rude, through my love of discussion and my eagerness to make us converse and show ourselves friends and ready to talk to one another.
Theodorus
That sort of thing would not be at all rude, Socrates; but tell one of the youths to answer your questions; for I am unused to such conversation and, moreover, I am not of an age to accustom myself to it.
But that would be fitting for these young men, and they would improve much more than I; for the fact is, youth admits of improvement in every way.
Come, question Theaetetus as you began to do, and do not let him off.
Socrates
Well, Theaetetus, you hear what Theodorus says, and I think you will not wish to disobey him, nor is it right for a young person to disobey a wise man when he gives instructions about such matters.
Come, speak up well and nobly.
What do you think knowledge is?
Theaetetus
Well, Socrates, I must, since you bid me.
For, if I make a mistake, you are sure to set me right.
Socrates
Certainly, if we can.
Theaetetus
Well then, I think the things one might learn from Theodorus are knowledge geometry and all the things you spoke of just now and also cobblery and the other craftsmen's arts; each and all of these are nothing else but knowledge.
Socrates
You are noble and generous, my friend, for when you are asked for one thing you give many, and a variety of things instead of a simple answer.
Theaetetus
What do you mean by that, Socrates?
Socrates
Nothing, perhaps; but I will tell you what I think I mean.
When you say "cobblery" you speak of nothing else than the art of making shoes, do you?
Theaetetus
Nothing else.
Socrates
And when you say "carpentry"?
Do you mean anything else than the art of making wooden furnishings?
Theaetetus
Nothing else by that, either.
Socrates
Then in both cases you define that to which each form of knowledge belongs?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
But the question, Theaetetus, was not to what knowledge belongs, nor how many the forms of knowledge are; for we did not wish to number them, but to find out what knowledge itself really is.
Or is there nothing in what I say?
Theaetetus
Nay, you are quite right.
Socrates
Take this example.
If anyone should ask us about some common everyday thing, for instance, what clay is, and we should reply that it is the potters' clay and the oven makers' clay and the brickmakers' clay, should we not be ridiculous?
Theaetetus
Perhaps.
Socrates
Yes in the first place for assuming that the questioner can understand from our answer what clay is, when we say "clay," no matter whether we add "the image-makers'" or any other craftsmen's.
Or does anyone, do you think, understand the name of anything when he does not know what the thing is?
Theaetetus
By no means.
Socrates
Then he does not understand knowledge of shoes if he does not know knowledge.
Theaetetus
No.
Socrates
Then he who is ignorant of knowledge does not understand cobblery or any other art.
Theaetetus
That is true.
Socrates
Then it is a ridiculous answer to the question "what is knowledge?"
when we give the name of some art; for we give in our answer something that knowledge belongs to, when that was not what we were asked.
Theaetetus
So it seems.
Socrates
Secondly, when we might have given a short, everyday answer, we go an interminable distance round;
for instance, in the question about clay, the everyday, simple thing would be to say "clay is earth mixed with moisture" without regard to whose clay it is.
Theaetetus
It seems easy just now, Socrates, as you put it; but you are probably asking the kind of thing that came up among us lately when your namesake, Socrates here, and I were talking together.
Socrates
What kind of thing was that, Theaetetus?
Theaetetus
Theodorus here was drawing some figures for us in illustration of roots, showing that squares containing three square feet and five square feet are not commensurable in length with the unit of the foot, and so, selecting each one in its turn up to the square containing seventeen square feet and at that he stopped.
Now it occurred to us, since the number of roots appeared to be infinite, to try to collect them under one name, by which we could henceforth call all the roots.
Socrates
And did you find such a name?
Theaetetus
I think we did.
But see if you agree.
Socrates
Speak on.
Theaetetus
We divided all number into two classes.
The one, the numbers which can be formed by multiplying equal factors, we represented by the shape of the square and called square or equilateral numbers.
Socrates
Well done!
Theaetetus
The numbers between these, such as three and five and all numbers which cannot be formed by multiplying equal factors, but only by multiplying a greater by a less or a less by a greater, and are therefore always contained in unequal sides, we represented by the shape of the oblong rectangle and called oblong numbers.
Socrates
Very good;
and what next?
Theaetetus
All the lines which form the four sides of the equilateral or square numbers we called lengths, and those which form the oblong numbers we called surds, because they are not commensurable with the others in length, but only in the areas of the planes which they have the power to form.
And similarly in the case of solids.
Socrates
Most excellent, my boys!
I think Theodorus will not be found liable to an action for false witness.
Theaetetus
But really, Socrates, I cannot answer that question of yours about knowledge, as we answered the question about length and square roots.
And yet you seem to me to want something of that kind.
So Theodorus appears to be a false witness after all.
Socrates
Nonsense, If he were praising your running and said he had never met any young man who was so good a runner, and then you were beaten in a race by a full grown man who held the record, do you think his praise would be any less truthful?
Theaetetus
Why, no.
Socrates
And do you think that the discovery of knowledge, as I was just now saying, is a small matter and not a task for the very ablest men?
Theaetetus
By Zeus, I think it is a task for the very ablest.
Socrates
Then you must have confidence in yourself, and believe that Theodorus is right, and try earnestly in every way to gain an understanding of the nature of knowledge as well as of other things.
Theaetetus
If it is a question of earnestness, Socrates, the truth will come to light.
Socrates
Well then for you pointed out the way admirably just now take your answer about the roots as a model, and just as you embraced them all in one class, though they were many, try to designate the many forms of knowledge by one definition.
Theaetetus
But I assure you, Socrates, I have often tried to work that out, when I heard reports of the questions that you asked,
but I can neither persuade myself that I have any satisfactory answer, nor can I find anyone else who gives the kind of answer you insist upon; and yet, on the other hand, I cannot get rid of a feeling of concern about the matter.
Socrates
Yes, you are suffering the pangs of labor, Theaetetus, because you are not empty, but pregnant.
Theaetetus
I do not know, Socrates; I merely tell you what I feel.
Socrates
Have you then not heard, you absurd boy, that I am the son of a noble and burly midwife, Phaenarete?
Theaetetus
Yes, I have heard that.
Socrates
And have you also heard that I practise the same art?
Theaetetus
No, never.
Socrates
But I assure you it is true; only do not tell on me to the others; for it is not known that I possess this art.
But other people, since they do not know it, do not say this of me, but say that I am a most eccentric person and drive men to distraction.
Have you heard that also?
Theaetetus
Yes, I have.
Socrates
Shall I tell you the reason then?
Theaetetus
Oh yes, do.
Socrates
Just take into consideration the whole business of the midwives, and you will understand more easily what I mean.
For you know, I suppose, that no one of them attends other women while she is still capable of conceiving and bearing but only those do so who have become too old to bear.
Theaetetus
Yes, certainly.
Socrates
They say the cause of this is Artemis, because she, a childless goddess, has had childbirth allotted to her as her special province.
Now it would seem she did not allow barren women to be midwives, because human nature is too weak to acquire an art which deals with matters of which it has no experience, but she gave the office to those who on account of age were not bearing children, honoring them for their likeness to herself.
Theaetetus
Very likely.
Socrates
Is it not, then, also likely and even necessary, that midwives should know better than anyone else who are pregnant and who are not?
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Socrates
And furthermore, the midwives, by means of drugs and incantations, are able to arouse the pangs of labor and, if they wish, to make them milder, and to cause those to bear who have difficulty in bearing; and they cause miscarriages if they think them desirable.
Theaetetus
That is true.
Socrates
Well, have you noticed this also about them, that they are the most skillful of matchmakers, since they are very wise in knowing what union of man and woman will produce the best possible children?
Theaetetus
I do not know that at all.
Socrates
But be assured that they are prouder of this than of their skill in cutting the umbilical cord.
Just consider.
Do you think the knowledge of what soil is best for each plant or seed belongs to the same art as the tending and harvesting of the fruits of the earth, or to another?
Theaetetus
To the same art.
Socrates
And in the case of a woman, do you think, my friend, that there is one art for the sowing and another for the harvesting?
Theaetetus
It is not likely.
Socrates
No;
but because there is a wrongful and unscientific way of bringing men and women together, which is called pandering, the midwives, since they are women of dignity and worth, avoid matchmaking, through fear of falling under the charge of pandering.
And yet the true midwife is the only proper match-maker.
Theaetetus
It seems so.
Socrates
So great, then, is the importance of midwives; but their function is less important than mine.
For women do not, like my patients, bring forth at one time real children and at another mere images which it is difficult to distinguish from the real.
For if they did, the greatest and noblest part of the work of the midwives would be in distinguishing between the real and the false.
Do you not think so?
Theaetetus
Yes, I do.
Socrates
All that is true of their art of midwifery is true also of mine, but mine differs from theirs in being practised upon men, not women, and in tending their souls in labor, not their bodies.
But the greatest thing about my art is this, that it can test in every way whether the mind of the young man is bringing forth a mere image, an imposture, or a real and genuine offspring.
For I have this in common with the midwives:
I am sterile in point of wisdom, and the reproach which has often been brought against me, that I question others but make no reply myself about anything, because I have no wisdom in me, is a true reproach;
and the reason of it is this: the god compels me to act as midwife, but has never allowed me to bring forth.
I am, then, not at all a wise person myself, nor have I any wise invention, the offspring born of my own soul; but those who associate with me, although at first some of them seem very ignorant, yet, as our acquaintance advances, all of them to whom the god is gracious make wonderful progress, not only in their own opinion, but in that of others as well.
And it is clear that they do this, not because they have ever learned anything from me, but because they have found in themselves many fair things and have brought them forth.
But the delivery is due to the god and me.
And the proof of it is this:
many before now, being ignorant of this fact and thinking that they were themselves the cause of their success, but despising me, have gone away from me sooner than they ought, whether of their own accord or because others persuaded them to do so.
Then, after they have gone away, they have miscarried thenceforth on account of evil companionship, and the offspring which they had brought forth through my assistance they have reared so badly that they have lost it; they have considered impostures and images of more importance than the truth, and at last it was evident to themselves, as well as to others, that they were ignorant.
One of these was Aristeides, the son of Lysimachus, and there are very many more.
When such men come back and beg me, as they do, with wonderful eagerness to let them join me again, the spiritual monitor that comes to me forbids me to associate with some of them, but allows me to converse with others, and these again make progress.
Now those who associate with me are in this matter also like women in childbirth; they are in pain and are full of trouble night and day, much more than are the women; and my art can arouse this pain and cause it to cease.
Well, that is what happens to them.
But in some cases, Theaetetus, when they do not seem to me to be exactly pregnant, since I see that they have no need of me, I act with perfect goodwill as match-maker and, under God, I guess very successfully with whom they can associate profitably, and I have handed over many of them to Prodicus, and many to other wise and inspired men.
Now I have said all this to you at such length, my dear boy, because I suspect that you, as you yourself believe, are in pain because you are pregnant with something within you.
Apply, then, to me, remembering that I am the son of a midwife and have myself a midwife's gifts, and do your best to answer the questions I ask as I ask them.
And if, when I have examined any of the things you say, it should prove that I think it is a mere image and not real, and therefore quietly take it from you and throw it away, do not be angry as women are when they are deprived of their first offspring.
For many, my dear friend, before this have got into such a state of mind towards me that they are actually ready to bite me, if I take some foolish notion away from them, and they do not believe that I do this in kindness, since they are far from knowing that no god is unkind to mortals, and that I do nothing of this sort from unkindness, either, and that it is quite out of the question for me to allow an imposture or to destroy the true.
And so, Theaetetus, begin again and try to tell us what knowledge is.
And never say that you are unable to do so; for if God wills it and gives you courage, you will be able.
Theaetetus
Well then, Socrates, since you are so urgent it would be disgraceful for anyone not to exert himself in every way to say what he can.
I think, then, that he who knows anything perceives that which he knows, and, as it appears at present, knowledge is nothing else than perception.
Socrates
Good, Excellent, my boy!
That is the way one ought to speak out.
But come now, let us examine your utterance together, and see whether it is a real offspring or a mere wind-egg.
Perception, you say, is knowledge?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
And, indeed, if I may venture to say so, it is not a bad description of knowledge that you have given, but one which Protagoras also used to give.
Only, he has said the same thing in a different way.
For he says somewhere that man is "the measure of all things, of the existence of the things that are and the non-existence of the things that are not."
You have read that, I suppose?
Theaetetus
Yes, I have read it often.
Socrates
Well, is not this about what he means, that individual things are for me such as they appear to me, and for you in turn such as they appear to you you and I being "man"?
Theaetetus
Yes, that is what he says.
Socrates
It is likely that a wise man is not talking nonsense; so let us follow after him.
Is it not true that sometimes, when the same wind blows, one of us feels cold, and the other does not?
or one feels slightly and the other exceedingly cold?
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Socrates
Then in that case, shall we say that the wind is in itself cold or not cold?
or shall we accept Protagoras's saying that it is cold for him who feels cold and not for him who does not?
Theaetetus
Apparently.
Socrates
Then it also seems cold, or not, to each of the two?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
But "seems" denotes perceiving?
Theaetetus
It does.
Socrates
Then seeming and perception are the same thing in matters of warmth and everything of that sort.
For as each person perceives things, such they are to each person.
Theaetetus
Apparently.
Socrates
Perception, then, is always of that which exists and, since it is knowledge, cannot be false.
Theaetetus
So it seems.
Socrates
By the Graces I wonder if Protagoras, who was a very wise man, did not utter this dark saying to the common herd like ourselves, and tell the truth in secret to his pupils.
Theaetetus
Why, Socrates, what do you mean by that?
Socrates
I will tell you and it is not a bad description, either, that nothing is one and invariable, and you could not rightly ascribe any quality whatsoever to anything, but if you call it large it will also appear to be small, and light if you call it heavy, and everything else in the same way, since nothing whatever is one, either a particular thing or of a particular quality;
but it is out of movement and motion and mixture with one another that all those things become which we wrongly say "are" wrongly, because nothing ever is, but is always becoming.
And on this subject all the philosophers, except Parmenides, may be marshalled in one line Protagoras and Heracleitus and Empedocles and the chief poets in the two kinds of poetry, Epicharmus, in comedy, and in tragedy, Homer, who, in the line"ceanus the origin of the gods, and Tethys their mother,"
has said that all things are the offspring of flow and motion;
or don't you think he means that?
Theaetetus
I think he does.
Socrates
Then who could still contend with such a great host, led by Homer as general, and not make himself ridiculous?
Theaetetus
It is not easy, Socrates.
Socrates
No, Theaetetus, it is not.
For the doctrine is amply proved by this, namely, that motion is the cause of that which passes for existence, that is, of becoming, whereas rest is the cause of non-existence and destruction; for warmth or fire, which, you know, is the parent and preserver of all other things, is itself the offspring of movement and friction, and these two are forms of motion.
Or are not these the source of fire?
Theaetetus
Yes, they are.
Socrates
And furthermore, the animal kingdom is sprung from these same sources.
Theaetetus
Of course.
Socrates
Well, then, is not the bodily habit destroyed by rest and idleness, and preserved, generally speaking, by gymnastic exercises and motions?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
Does not the soul acquire information and is it not preserved and made better through learning and practice, which are motions, whereas through rest, which is want of practice and of study, it learns nothing and forgets what it has learned?
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Socrates
Then the good, both for the soul and for the body, is motion, and rest is the opposite?
Theaetetus
Apparently.
Socrates
Now shall I go on and mention to you also windless air, calm sea, and all that sort of thing, and say that stillness causes decay and destruction and that the opposite brings preservation?
And shall I add to this the all-compelling and crowning argument that Homer by "the golden chain" refers to nothing else than the sun, and means that so long as the heavens and the sun go round everything exists and is preserved, among both gods and men, but if the motion should stop, as if bound fast, everything would be destroyed and would, as the saying is, be turned upside down?
Theaetetus
Yes, Socrates, I think he means what you say he does.
Socrates
Then, my friend, you must apply the doctrine in this way: first as concerns vision, the color that you call white is not to be taken as something separate outside of your eyes, nor yet as something inside of them; and you must not assign any place to it, for then it would at once be in a definite position and stationary and would have no part in the process of becoming.
Theaetetus
But what do you mean?
Socrates
Let us stick close to the statement we made a moment ago, and assume that nothing exists by itself as invariably one: then it will be apparent that black or white or any other color whatsoever is the result of the impact of the eye upon the appropriate motion, and therefore that which we call color will be in each instance neither that which impinges nor that which is impinged upon, but something between, which has occurred, peculiar to each individual.
Or would you maintain that each color appears to a dog, or any other animal you please, just as it does to you?
Theaetetus
No, by Zeus, I wouldn't.
Socrates
Well, does anything whatsoever appear the same to any other man as to you?
Are you sure of this?
Or are you not much more convinced that nothing appears the same even to you, because you yourself are never exactly the same?
Theaetetus
Yes, I am much more convinced of the last.
Socrates
Then, if that with which I compare myself in size, or which I touch, were really large or white or hot, it would never have become different by coming in contact with something different, without itself changing; and if, on the other hand, that which did the comparing or the touching were really large or white or hot, it would not have become different when something different approached it or was affected in some way by it, without being affected in some way itself.
For nowadays, my friend, we find ourselves rather easily forced to make extraordinary and absurd statements, as Protagoras and everyone who undertakes to agree with him would say.
Theaetetus
What statements do you mean?
Socrates
Take a little example and you will know all I have in mind.
Given six dice, for instance, if you compare four with them, we say that they are more than the four, half as many again, but if you compare twelve with them, we say they are less, half as many; and any other statement would be inadmissible; or would you admit any other?
Theaetetus
Not I.
Socrates
Well then, if Protagoras, or anyone else, ask you, "Theaetetus, can anything become greater or more in any other way than by being increased?"
what reply will you make?
Theaetetus
If I am to say what I think, Socrates, with reference to the present question, I should say "no," but if I consider the earlier question, I should say "yes," for fear of contradicting myself.
Socrates
Good, by Hera, excellent, my friend!
But apparently, if you answer "yes" it will be in the Euripidean spirit; for our tongue will be unconvinced, but not our mind.
Theaetetus
True.
Socrates
Well, if you and I were clever and wise and had found out everything about the mind, we should henceforth spend the rest of our time testing each other out of the fulness of our wisdom, rushing together like sophists in a sophistical combat, battering each other's arguments with counter arguments.
But, as it is, since we are ordinary people, we shall wish in the first place to look into the real essence of our thoughts and see whether they harmonize with one another or not at all.
Theaetetus
Certainly that is what I should like.
Socrates
And so should I.
But since this is the case, and we have plenty of time, shall we not quietly, without any impatience, but truly examining ourselves, consider again the nature of these appearances within us?
And as we consider them, I shall say, I think, first, that nothing can ever become more or less in size or number, so long as it remains equal to itself.
Is it not so?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
And secondly, that anything to which nothing is added and from which nothing is subtracted, is neither increased nor diminished, but is always equal.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Socrates
And should we not say thirdly, that what was not previously could not afterwards be without becoming and having become?
Theaetetus
Yes, I agree.
Socrates
These three assumptions contend with one another in our minds when we talk about the dice, or when we say that I, who do not, at my age, either increase in size or diminish, am in the course of a year first larger than you, who are young, and afterwards smaller, when nothing has been taken from my size, but you have grown.
For I am, it seems, afterwards what I was not before, and I have not become so; for it is impossible to have become without becoming, and without losing anything of my size I could not become smaller.
And there are countless myriads of such contradictions, if we are to accept these that I have mentioned.
You follow me, I take it, Theaetetus, for I think you are not new at such things.
Theaetetus
By the gods, Socrates, I am lost in wonder when I think of all these things, and sometimes when I regard them it really makes my head swim.
Socrates
Theodorus seems to be a pretty good guesser about your nature.
For this feeling of wonder shows that you are a philosopher, since wonder is the only beginning of philosophy, and he who said that Iris was the child of Thaumas made a good genealogy.
But do you begin to understand why these things are so, according to the doctrine we attribute to Protagoras, or do you not as yet?
Theaetetus
Not yet, I think.
Socrates
And will you be grateful to me if I help you to search out the hidden truth of the thought of a famous man or, I should say, of famous men?
Theaetetus
Of course I shall be grateful, very grateful.
Socrates
Look round and see that none of the uninitiated is listening.
The uninitiated are those who think nothing is except what they can grasp firmly with their hands, and who deny the existence of actions and generation and all that is invisible.
Theaetetus
Truly, Socrates, those you speak of are very stubborn and perverse mortals.
Socrates
So they are, my boy, quite without culture.
But others are more clever, whose secret doctrines I am going to disclose to you.
For them the beginning, upon which all the things we were just now speaking of depend, is the assumption that everything is real motion and that there is nothing besides this, but that there are two kinds of motion, each infinite in the number of its manifestations, and of these kinds one has an active, the other a passive force.
From the union and friction of these two are born offspring, infinite in number, but always twins, the object of sense and the sense which is always born and brought forth together with the object of sense.
Now we give the senses names like these: sight and hearing and smell, and the sense of cold and of heat, and pleasures and pains and desires and fears and so forth.
Those that have names are very numerous, and those that are unnamed are innumerable.
Now the class of objects of sense is akin to each of these; all sorts of colors are akin to all sorts of acts of vision, and in the same way sounds to acts of hearing, and the other objects of sense spring forth akin to the other senses.
What does this tale mean for us, Theaetetus, with reference to what was said before?
Do you see?
Theaetetus
Not quite, Socrates.
Socrates
Just listen; perhaps we can finish the tale.
It means, of course, that all these things are, as we were saying, in motion, and their motion has in it either swiftness or slowness.
Now the slow element keeps its motion in the same place and directed towards such things as draw near it, and indeed it is in this way that it begets.
But the things begotten in this way are quicker;
for they move from one place to another, and their motion is naturally from one place to another.
Now when the eye and some appropriate object which approaches beget whiteness and the corresponding perception which could never have been produced by either of them going to anything else then, while sight from the eye and whiteness from that which helps to produce the color are moving from one to the other,
the eye becomes full of sight and so begins at that moment to see, and becomes, certainly not sight, but a seeing eye, and the object which joined in begetting the color is filled with whiteness and becomes in its turn, not whiteness, but white, whether it be a stick or a stone, or whatever it be the hue of which is so colored.
And all the rest hard and hot and so forth must be regarded in the same way: we must assume, we said before, that nothing exists in itself, but all things of all sorts arise out of motion by intercourse with each other; for it is, as they say, impossible to form a firm conception of the active or the passive element as being anything separately; for there is no active element until there is a union with the passive element, nor is there a passive element until there is a union with the active;
and that which unites with one thing is active and appears again as passive when it comes in contact with something else.
And so it results from all this, as we said in the beginning, that nothing exists as invariably one, itself by itself, but everything is always becoming in relation to something, and "being" should be altogether abolished, though we have often and even just now been compelled by custom and ignorance to use the word.
But we ought not, the wise men say, to permit the use of "something" or "somebody's" or "mine" or "this" or "that" or any other word that implies making things stand still, but in accordance with nature we should speak of things as "becoming" and "being made" and "being destroyed" and "changing"; for anyone who by his mode of speech makes things stand still is easily refuted.
And we must use such expressions in relation both to particular objects and collective designations, among which are "mankind" and "stone" and the names of every animal and class.
Do these doctrines seem pleasant to you, Theaetetus, and do you find their taste agreeable?
Theaetetus
I don't know, Socrates; besides, I can't tell about you, either, whether you are preaching them because you believe them or to test me.
Socrates
You forget, my friend, that I myself know nothing about such things, and claim none of them as mine, but am incapable of bearing them and am merely acting as a midwife to you, and for that reason am uttering incantations and giving you a taste of each of the philosophical theories, until I may help to bring your own opinion to light.
And when it is brought to light, I will examine it and see whether it is a mere wind-egg or a real offspring.
So be brave and patient, and in good and manly fashion tell what you think in reply to my questions.
Theaetetus
Very well; ask them.
Socrates
Then say once more whether the doctrine pleases you that nothing is, but is always becoming good or beautiful or any of the other qualities we were just enumerating.
Theaetetus
Why, when I hear you telling about it as you did, it seems to me that it is wonderfully reasonable and ought to be accepted as you have presented it.
Socrates
Let us, then, not neglect a point in which it is defective.
The defect is found in connection with dreams and diseases, including insanity, and everything else that is said to cause illusions of sight and hearing and the other senses.
For of course you know that in all these the doctrine we were just presenting seems admittedly to be refuted, because in them we certainly have false perceptions, and it is by no means true that everything is to each man which appears to him; on the contrary, nothing is which appears.
Theaetetus
What you say is very true, Socrates.
Socrates
What argument is left, then, my boy, for the man who says that perception is knowledge and that in each case the things which appear are to the one to whom they appear?
Theaetetus
I hesitate to say, Socrates, that I have no reply to make, because you scolded me just now when I said that.
But really I cannot dispute that those who are insane or dreaming have false opinions, when some of them think they are gods and others fancy in their sleep that they have wings and are flying.
Socrates
Don't you remember, either, the similar dispute about these errors, especially about sleeping and waking?
Theaetetus
What dispute?
Socrates
One which I fancy you have often heard.
The question is asked, what proof you could give if anyone should ask us now, at the present moment, whether we are asleep and our thoughts are a dream, or whether we are awake and talking with each other in a waking condition.
Theaetetus
Really, Socrates, I don't see what proof can be given; for there is an exact correspondence in all particulars, as between the strophe and antistrophe of a choral song.
Take, for instance, the conversation we have just had: there is nothing to prevent us from imagining in our sleep also that we are carrying on this conversation with each other, and when in a dream we imagine that we are relating dreams, the likeness between the one talk and the other is remarkable.
Socrates
So you see it is not hard to dispute the point, since it is even open to dispute whether we are awake or in a dream.
Now since the time during which we are asleep is equal to that during which we are awake, in each state our spirit contends that the semblances that appear to it at any time are certainly true, so that for half the time we say that this is true, and for half the time the other, and we maintain each with equal confidence.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Socrates
And may not, then, the same be said about insanity and the other diseases, except that the time is not equal?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
Well, then, shall truth be determined by the length or shortness of time?
Theaetetus
That would be absurd in many ways.
Socrates
But can you show clearly in any other way which of the two sets of opinions is true?
Theaetetus
I do not think I can.
Socrates
Listen, then, while I tell you what would be said about them by those who maintain that what appears at any time is true for him to whom it appears.
They begin, I imagine, by asking this question: "Theaetetus, can that which is wholly other have in any way the same quality as its alternative?
And we must not assume that the thing in question is partially the same and partially other, but wholly other."
Theaetetus
It is impossible for it to be the same in anything, either in quality or in any other respect whatsoever, when it is wholly other.
Socrates
Must we not, then, necessarily agree that such a thing is also unlike?
Theaetetus
It seems so to me.
Socrates
Then if anything happens to become like or unlike anything either itself or anything else we shall say that when it becomes like it becomes the same, and when it becomes unlike it becomes other?
Theaetetus
We must.
Socrates
Well, we said before, did we not, that the active elements were many infinite in fact and likewise the passive elements?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
And furthermore, that any given element, by uniting at different times with different partners, will beget, not the same, but other results?
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Socrates
Well, then, let us take me, or you, or anything else at hand, and apply the same principle say Socrates in health and Socrates in illness.
Shall we say the one is like the other, or unlike?
Theaetetus
When you say "Socrates in illness" do you mean to compare that Socrates as a whole with Socrates in health as a whole?
Socrates
You understand perfectly; that is just what I mean.
Theaetetus
Unlike, I imagine.
Socrates
And therefore other, inasmuch as unlike?
Theaetetus
Necessarily.
Socrates
And you would say the same of Socrates asleep or in any of the other states we enumerated just now?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
Then each of those elements which by the law of their nature act upon something else, will, when it gets hold of Socrates in health, find me one object to act upon, and when it gets hold of me in illness, another?
Theaetetus
How can it help it?
Socrates
And so, in the two cases, that active element and I, who am the passive element, shall each produce a different object?
Theaetetus
Of course.
Socrates
So, then, when I am in health and drink wine, it seems pleasant and sweet to me?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
The reason is, in fact, that according to the principles we accepted a while ago, the active and passive elements produce sweetness and perception, both of which are simultaneously moving from one place to another, and the perception, which comes from the passive element, makes the tongue perceptive, and the sweetness, which comes from the wine and pervades it, passes over and makes the wine both to be and to seem sweet to the tongue that is in health.
Theaetetus
Certainly, such are the principles we accepted a while ago.
Socrates
But when it gets hold of me in illness, in the first place, it really doesn't get hold of the same man, does it?
For he to whom it comes is certainly unlike.
Theaetetus
True.
Socrates
Therefore the union of the Socrates who is ill and the draught of wine produces other results: in the tongue the sensation or perception of bitterness, and in the wine a bitterness which is engendered there and passes over into the other; the wine is made, not bitterness, but bitter, and I am made, not perception, but perceptive.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Socrates
Then I shall never have this perception of any other thing; for a perception of another thing is another perception, and makes the percipient different and other: nor can that which acts on me ever by union with another produce the same result or become the same in kind; for by producing another result from another passive element it will become different in kind.
Theaetetus
That is true.
Socrates
And neither shall I, furthermore, ever again become the same as I am, nor will that ever become the same as it is.
Theaetetus
No.
Socrates
And yet, when I become percipient, I must necessarily become percipient of something, for it is impossible to become percipient and perceive nothing; and that which is perceived must become so to someone, when it becomes sweet or bitter or the like; for to become sweet, but sweet to no one, is impossible.
Theaetetus
Perfectly true.
Socrates
The result, then, I think, is that we (the active and the passive elements) are or become, whichever is the case, in relation to one another, since we are bound to one another by the inevitable law of our being, but to nothing else, not even to ourselves.
The result, then, is that we are bound to one another; and so if a man says anything "is," he must say it is to or of or in relation to something, and similarly if he says it "becomes"; but he must not say it is or becomes absolutely, nor can he accept such a statement from anyone else.
That is the meaning of the doctrine we have been describing.
Theaetetus
Yes, quite so, Socrates.
Socrates
Then, since that which acts on me is to me and to me only, it is also the case that I perceive it, and I only?
Theaetetus
Of course.
Socrates
Then to me my perception is true; for in each case it is always part of my being; and I am, as Protagoras says, the judge of the existence of the things that are to me and of the non-existence of those that are not to me.
Theaetetus
So it seems.
Socrates
How, then, if I am an infallible judge and my mind never stumbles in regard to the things that are or that become, can I fail to know that which I perceive?
Theaetetus
You cannot possibly fail.
Socrates
Therefore you were quite right in saying that knowledge is nothing else than perception, and there is complete identity between the doctrine of Homer and Heracleitus and all their followers that all things are in motion, like streams the doctrine of the great philosopher Protagoras that man is the measure of all things and the doctrine of Theaetetus that, since these things are true, perception is knowledge.
Eh, Theaetetus?
Shall we say that this is, so to speak, your new-born child and the result of my midwifery?
Or what shall we say?
Theaetetus
We must say that, Socrates.
Socrates
Well, we have at last managed to bring this forth, whatever it turns out to be;
and now that it is born, we must in very truth perform the rite of running round with it in a circle the circle of our argument and see whether it may not turn out to be after all not worth rearing, but only a wind-egg, an imposture.
But, perhaps, you think that any offspring of yours ought to be cared for and not put away; or will you bear to see it examined and not get angry if it is taken away from you, though it is your first-born?
Theodorus
Theaetetus will bear it, Socrates, for he is not at all ill-tempered.
But for heaven's sake, Socrates, tell me, is all this wrong after all?
Socrates
You are truly fond of argument, Theodorus, and a very good fellow to think that I am a sort of bag full of arguments and can easily pull one out and say that after all the other one was wrong; but you do not understand what is going on: none of the arguments comes from me, but always from him who is talking with me.
I myself know nothing, except just a little, enough to extract an argument from another man who is wise and to receive it fairly.
And now I will try to extract this thought, but not to say anything myself.
Theodorus
That is the better way, Socrates; do as you say.
Socrates
Do you know, then, Theodorus, what amazes me in your friend Protagoras?
Theodorus
What is it?
Socrates
In general I like his doctrine that what appears to each one is to him, but I am amazed by the beginning of his book.
I don't see why he does not say in the beginning of his Truth that a pig or a dog-faced baboon or some still stranger creature of those that have sensations is the measure of all things.
Then he might have begun to speak to us very imposingly and condescendingly, showing that while we were honoring him like a god for his wisdom, he was after all no better in intellect than any other man, or, for that matter, than a tadpole.
What alternative is there, Theodorus?
For if that opinion is true to each person which he acquires through sensation, and no one man can discern another's condition better than he himself, and one man has no better right to investigate whether another's opinion is true or false than he himself, but, as we have said several times, each man is to form his own opinions by himself, and these opinions are always right and true,
why in the world, my friend, was Protagoras wise, so that he could rightly be thought worthy to be the teacher of other men and to be well paid, and why were we ignorant creatures and obliged to go to school to him, if each person is the measure of his own wisdom?
Must we not believe that Protagoras was "playing to the gallery" in saying this?
I say nothing of the ridicule that I and my science of midwifery deserve in that case, and, I should say, the whole practice of dialectics, too.
For would not the investigation of one another's fancies and opinions, and the attempt to refute them, when each man's must be right, be tedious and blatant folly, if the Truth of Protagoras is true and he was not jesting when he uttered his oracles from the shrine of his book?
Theodorus
Socrates, the man was my friend, as you just remarked.
So I should hate to bring about the refutation of Protagoras by agreeing with you, and I should hate also to oppose you contrary to my real convictions.
So take Theaetetus again; especially as he seemed just now to follow your suggestions very carefully.
Socrates
If you went to Sparta, Theodorus, and visited the wrestling-schools, would you think it fair to look on at other people naked, some of whom were of poor physique, without stripping and showing your own form, too?
Theodorus
Why not, if I could persuade them to allow me to do so?
So now I think I shall persuade you to let me be a spectator, and not to drag me into the ring, since I am old and stiff, but to take the younger and nimbler man as your antagonist.
Socrates
Well, Theodorus, if that pleases you, it does not displease me, as the saying is.
So I must attack the wise Theaetetus again.
Tell me, Theaetetus, referring to the doctrine we have just expounded, do you not share my amazement at being suddenly exalted to an equality with the wisest man, or even god?
Or do you think Protagoras's "measure" applies any less to gods than to men?
Theaetetus
By no means; and I am amazed that you ask such a question at all;
for when we were discussing the meaning of the doctrine that whatever appears to each one really is to him, I thought it was good; but now it has suddenly changed to the opposite.
Socrates
You are young, my dear boy; so you are quickly moved and swayed by popular oratory.
For in reply to what I have said, Protagoras, or someone speaking for him, will say,
"Excellent boys and old men, there you sit together declaiming to the people, and you bring in the gods, the question of whose existence or non-existence I exclude from oral and written discussion, and you say the sort of thing that the crowd would readily accept that it is a terrible thing if every man is to be no better than any beast in point of wisdom; but you do not advance any cogent proof whatsoever; you base your statements on probability.
If Theodorus, or any other geometrician, should base his geometry on probability, he would be of no account at all.
So you and Theodorus had better consider whether you will accept arguments founded on plausibility and probabilities in such important matters."
Theaetetus
That would not be right, Socrates; neither you nor we would think so.
Socrates
Apparently, then, you and Theodorus mean we must look at the matter in a different way.
Theaetetus
Yes, certainly in a different way.
Socrates
Well, then, let us look at it in this way, raising the question whether knowledge is after all the same as perception, or different.
For that is the object of all our discussion, and it was to answer that question than we stirred up all these strange doctrines, was it not?
Theaetetus
Most assuredly.
Socrates
Shall we then agree that all that we perceive by sight or hearing we know?
For instance, shall we say that before having learned the language of foreigners we do not hear them when they speak, or that we both hear and know what they say?
And again, if we do not know the letters, shall we maintain that we do not see them when we look at them or that if we really see them we know them?
Theaetetus
We shall say, Socrates, that we know just so much of them as we hear or see: in the case of the letters, we both see and know the form and color, and in the spoken language we both hear and at the same time know the higher and lower notes of the voice; but we do not perceive through sight or hearing, and we do not know, what the grammarians and interpreters teach about them.
Socrates
First-rate, Theaetetus!
and it is a pity to dispute that, for I want you to grow.
But look out for another trouble that is yonder coming towards us, and see how we can repel it.
Theaetetus
What is it?
Socrates
It is like this: If anyone should ask, "Is it possible, if a man has ever known a thing and still has and preserves a memory of that thing, that he does not, at the time when he remembers, know that very thing which he remembers?"
I seem to be pretty long winded; but I merely want to ask if a man who has learned a thing does not know it when he remembers it.
Theaetetus
Of course he does, Socrates;
for what you suggest would be monstrous.
Socrates
Am I crazy, then?
Look here.
Do you not say that seeing is perceiving and that sight is perception?
Theaetetus
I do.
Socrates
Then, according to what we have just said, the man who has seen a thing has acquired knowledge of that which he has seen?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
Well, then, do you not admit that there is such a thing as memory?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
Memory of nothing or of something?
Theaetetus
Of something, surely.
Socrates
Of things he has learned and perceived that sort of things?
Theaetetus
Of course.
Socrates
A man sometimes remembers what he has seen, does he not?
Theaetetus
He remembers.
Socrates
Even when he shuts his eyes, or does he forget if he does that?
Theaetetus
It would be absurd to say that, Socrates.
Socrates
We must, though, if we are to maintain our previous argument; otherwise, it is all up with it.
Theaetetus
I too, by Zeus, have my suspicions, but I don't fully understand you.
Tell me how it is.
Socrates
This is how it is: he who sees has acquired knowledge, we say, of that which he has seen; for it is agreed that sight and perception and knowledge are all the same.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Socrates
But he who has seen and has acquired knowledge of what he saw, if he shuts his eyes, remembers it, but does not see it.
Is that right?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
But "does not see" is the same as "does not know," if it is true that seeing is knowing.
Theaetetus
True.
Socrates
Then this is our result; When a man has acquired knowledge of a thing and still remembers it, he does not know it, since he does not see it; but we said that would be a monstrous conclusion.
Theaetetus
Very true.
Socrates
So, evidently, we reach an impossible result if we say that knowledge and perception are the same.
Theaetetus
So it seems.
Socrates
Then we must say they are different.
Theaetetus
I suppose so.
Socrates
Then what can knowledge be?
We must, apparently, begin our discussion all over again.
And yet, Theaetetus, what are we on the point of doing?
Theaetetus
About what?
Socrates
It seems to me that we are behaving like a worthless game-cock; before winning the victory we have leapt away from our argument and begun to crow.
Theaetetus
How so?
Socrates
We seem to be acting like professional debaters; we have based our agreements on the mere similarity of words and are satisfied to have got the better of the argument in such a way, and we do not see that we, who claim to be, not contestants for a prize, but lovers of wisdom, are doing just what those ingenious persons do.
Theaetetus
I do not yet understand what you mean.
Socrates
Well, I will try to make my thought clear.
We asked, you recollect, whether a man who has learned something and remembers it does not know it.
We showed first that the one who has seen and then shuts his eyes remembers, although he does not see, and then we showed that he does not know, although at the same time he remembers; but this, we said, was impossible.
And so the Protagorean tale was brought to naught, and yours also about the identity of knowledge and perception.
Theaetetus
Evidently.
Socrates
It would not be so, I fancy, my friend, if the father of the first of the two tales were alive; he would have had a good deal to say in its defence.
But he is dead, and we are abusing the orphan.
Why, even the guardians whom Protagoras left one of whom is Theodorus here are unwilling to come to the child's assistance.
So it seems that we shall have to do it ourselves, assisting him in the name of justice.
Theodorus
Do so, for it is not I, Socrates, but rather Callias the son of Hipponicus, who is the guardian of his children.
As for me, I turned rather too soon from abstract speculations to geometry.
However, I shall be grateful to you if you come to his assistance.
Socrates
Good, Theodorus!
Now see how I shall help him;
for a man might find himself involved in still worse inconsistencies than those in which we found ourselves just now, if he did not pay attention to the terms which we generally use in assent and denial.
Shall I explain this to you, or only to Theaetetus?
Theodorus
To both of us, but let the younger answer; for he will be less disgraced if he is discomfited.
Socrates
Very well; now I am going to ask the most frightfully difficult question of all.
It runs, I believe, something like this: Is it possible for a person, if he knows a thing, at the same time not to know that which he knows?
Theodorus
Now, then, what shall we answer, Theaetetus?
Theaetetus
It is impossible, I should think.
Socrates
Not if you make seeing and knowing identical.
For what will you do with a question from which there is no escape, by which you are, as the saying is, caught in a pit, when your adversary, unabashed, puts his hand over one of your eyes and asks if you see his cloak with the eye that is covered?
Theaetetus
I shall say, I think, "Not with that eye, but with the other."
Socrates
Then you see and do not see the same thing at the same time?
Theaetetus
After a fashion.
Socrates
"That," he will reply, "is not at all what I want, and I did not ask about the fashion, but whether you both know and do not know the same thing.
Now manifestly you see that which you do not see.
But you have agreed that seeing is knowing and not seeing is not knowing.
Very well; from all this, reckon out what the result is."
Theaetetus
Well, I reckon out that the result is the contrary of my hypothesis.
Socrates
And perhaps, my fine fellow, more troubles of the same sort might have come upon you, if anyone asked you further questions whether it is possible to know the same thing both sharply and dully, to know close at hand but not at a distance, to know both violently and gently, and countless other questions, such as a nimble fighter, fighting for pay in the war of words, might have lain in wait and asked you, when you said that knowledge and perception were the same thing; he would have charged down upon hearing and smelling and such senses, and would have argued persistently and unceasingly until you were filled with admiration of his greatly desired wisdom and were taken in his toils, and then, after subduing and binding you he would at once proceed to bargain with you for such ransom as might be agreed upon between you.
What argument, then, you might ask, will Protagoras produce to strengthen his forces?
Shall we try to carry on the discussion?
Theaetetus
By all means.
Socrates
He will, I fancy, say all that we have said in his defence and then will close with us, saying contemptuously, "Our estimable Socrates here frightened a little boy by asking if it was possible for one and the same person to remember and at the same time not to know one and the same thing, and when the child in his fright said 'no,' because he could not foresee what would result, Socrates made poor me a laughing-stock in his talk.
But, you slovenly Socrates, the facts stand thus:
when you examine any doctrine of mine by the method of questioning, if the person who is questioned makes such replies as I should make and comes to grief, then I am refuted, but if his replies are quite different, then the person questioned is refuted, not I.
Do you suppose you could get anybody to admit that the memory a man has of a past feeling he no longer feels is anything like the feeling at the time when he was feeling it?
Far from it.
Or that he would refuse to admit that it is possible for one and the same person to know and not to know one and the same thing?
Or if he were afraid to admit this, would he ever admit that a person who has become unlike is the same as before he became unlike?
In fact, if we are to be on our guard against such verbal entanglements, would he admit that a person is one at all, and not many, who become infinite in number, if the process of becoming different continues?
But, my dear fellow," he will say, "attack my real doctrines in a more generous manner, and prove, if you can, that perceptions, when they come, or become, to each of us, are not individual, or that, if they are individual, what appears to each one would not, for all that, become to that one alone or, if you prefer to say 'be,' would not be to whom it appears.
But when you talk of pigs and dog-faced baboons, you not only act like a pig yourself, but you persuade your hearers to act so toward my writings, and that is not right.
For I maintain that the truth is as I have written; each one of us is the measure of the things that are and those that are not; but each person differs immeasurably from every other in just this, that to one person some things appear and are, and to another person other things.
And I do not by any means say that wisdom and the wise man do not exist; on the contrary, I say that if bad things appear and are to any one of us, precisely that man is wise who causes a change and makes good things appear and be to him.
And, moreover, do not lay too much stress upon the words of my argument, but get a clearer understanding of my meaning from what I am going to say.
Recall to your mind what was said before, that his food appears and is bitter to the sick man, but appears and is the opposite of bitter to the man in health.
Now neither of these two is to be made wiser than he is that is not possible nor should the claim be made that the sick man is ignorant because his opinions are ignorant, or the healthy man wise because his are different; but a change must be made from the one condition to the other, for the other is better.
So, too, in education a change has to be made from a worse to a better condition; but the physician causes the change by means of drugs, and the teacher of wisdom by means of words.
And yet, in fact, no one ever made anyone think truly who previously thought falsely, since it is impossible to think that which is not or to think any other things than those which one feels; and these are always true.
But I believe that a man who, on account of a bad condition of soul, thinks thoughts akin to that condition, is made by a good condition of soul to think correspondingly good thoughts; and some men, through inexperience, call these appearances true, whereas I call them better than the others, but in no wise truer.
And the wise, my dear Socrates, I do not by any means call tadpoles when they have to do with the human body, I call them physicians, and when they have to do with plants, husbandmen; for I assert that these latter, when plants are sickly, instil into them good and healthy sensations, and true ones instead of bad sensations, and that the wise and good orators make the good, instead of the evil, seem to be right to their states.
For I claim that whatever seems right and honorable to a state is really right and honorable to it, so long as it believes it to be so; but the wise man causes the good, instead of that which is evil to them in each instance, to be and seem right and honorable.
And on the same principle the teacher who is able to train his pupils in this manner is not only wise but is also entitled to receive high pay from them when their education is finished.
And in this sense it is true that some men are wiser than others, and that no one thinks falsely, and that you, whether you will or no, must endure to be a measure.
Upon these positions my doctrine stands firm; and if you can dispute it in principle, dispute it by bringing an opposing doctrine against it; or if you prefer the method of questions, ask questions; for an intelligent person ought not to reject this method, on the contrary, he should choose it before all others.
However, let me make a suggestion: do not be unfair in your questioning; it is very inconsistent for a man who asserts that he cares for virtue to be constantly unfair in discussion; and it is unfair in discussion when a man makes no distinction between merely trying to make points and carrying on a real argument.
In the former he may jest and try to trip up his opponent as much as he can, but in real argument he must be in earnest and must set his interlocutor on his feet, pointing out to him those slips only which are due to himself and his previous associations.
For if you act in this way, those who debate with you will cast the blame for their confusion and perplexity upon themselves, not upon you; they will run after you and love you, and they will hate themselves and run away from themselves, taking refuge in philosophy, that they may escape from their former selves by becoming different.
But if you act in the opposite way, as most teachers do, you will produce the opposite result, and instead of making your young associates philosophers, you will make them hate philosophy when they grow older.
If therefore, you will accept the suggestion which I made before, you will avoid a hostile and combative attitude and in a gracious spirit will enter the lists with me and inquire what we really mean when we declare that all things are in motion and that whatever seems is to each individual, whether man or state.
And on the basis of that you will consider the question whether knowledge and perception are the same or different, instead of doing as you did a while ago, using as your basis the ordinary meaning of names and words, which most people pervert in haphazard ways and thereby cause all sorts of perplexity in one another."
Such, Theodorus, is the help I have furnished your friend to the best of my ability not much, for my resources are small; but if he were living himself he would have helped his offspring in a fashion more magnificent.
Theodorus
You are joking, Socrates, for you have come to the man's assistance with all the valor of youth.
Socrates
Thank you, my friend.
Tell me, did you observe just now that Protagoras reproached us for addressing our words to a boy, and said that we made the boy's timidity aid us in our argument against his doctrine, and that he called our procedure a mere display of wit, solemnly insisting upon the importance of "the measure of all things," and urging us to treat his doctrine seriously?
Theodorus
Of course I observed it, Socrates.
Socrates
Well then, shall we do as he says?
Theodorus
By all means.
Socrates
Now you see that all those present, except you and myself are boys.
So if we are to do as the man asks, you and I must question each other and make reply in order to show our serious attitude towards his doctrine; then he cannot, at any rate, find fault with us on the ground that we examined his doctrine in a spirit of levity with mere boys.
Theodorus
Why is this?
Would not Theaetetus follow an investigation better than many a man with a long beard?
Socrates
Yes, but not better than you, Theodorus.
So you must not imagine that I have to defend your deceased friend by any and every means, while you do nothing at all;
but come, my good man, follow the discussion a little way, just until we can see whether, after all, you must be a measure in respect to diagrams, or whether all men are as sufficient unto themselves as you are in astronomy and the other sciences in which you are alleged to be superior.
Theodorus
It is not easy, Socrates, for anyone to sit beside you and not be forced to give an account of himself and it was foolish of me just now to say you would excuse me and would not oblige me, as the Lacedaemonians do, to strip; you seem to me to take rather after Sciron.
For the Lacedaemonians tell people to go away or else strip, but you seem to me to play rather the role of Antaeus; for you do not let anyone go who approaches you until you have forced him to strip and wrestle with you in argument.
Theodorus
I say no more.
Lead on as you like.
Most assuredly I must endure whatsoever fate you spin for me, and submit to interrogation.
However, I shall not be able to leave myself in your hands beyond the point you propose.
Socrates
Even that is enough.
And please be especially careful that we do not inadvertently give a playful turn to our argument and somebody reproach us again for it.
Theodorus
Rest assured that I will try so far as in me lies.
Socrates
Let us, therefore, first take up the same question as before, and let us see whether we were right or wrong in being displeased and finding fault with the doctrine because it made each individual self-sufficient in wisdom.
Theodorus
Yes.
Socrates
Now if he himself were present and could agree to this, instead of our making the concession for him in our effort to help him, there would be no need of taking up the question again or of reinforcing his argument.
But, as it is, perhaps it might be said that we have no authority to make the agreement for him;
therefore it is better to make the agreement still clearer on this particular point;
for it makes a good deal of difference whether it is so or not.
Theodorus
That is true.
Socrates
Let us then get the agreement in as concise a form as possible, not through others, but from his own statement.
Theodorus
How?
Socrates
In this way:
"that which appears to each person really is to him to whom it appears."
Theodorus
Yes, that is what he says.
Socrates
Well then, Protagoras, we also utter the opinions of a man, or rather, of all men, and we say that there is no one who does not think himself wiser than others in some respects and others wiser than himself in other respects; for instance, in times of greatest danger, when people are distressed in war or by diseases or at sea, they regard their commanders as gods and expect them to be their saviors, though they excel them in nothing except knowledge.
And all the world of men is, I dare say, full of people seeking teachers and rulers for themselves and the animals and for human activities, and, on the other hand, of people who consider themselves qualified to teach and qualified to rule.
And in all these instances we must say that men themselves believe that wisdom and ignorance exist in the world of men, must we not?
Theodorus
Yes, we must.
Socrates
And therefore they think that wisdom is true thinking and ignorance false opinion, do they not?
Theodorus
Of course.
Socrates
Well then, Protagoras, what shall we do about the doctrine?
Shall we say that the opinions which men have are always true, or sometimes true and sometimes false?
For the result of either statement is that their opinions are not always true, but may be either true or false.
Just think, Theodorus, would any follower of Protagoras, or you yourself care to contend that no person thinks that another is ignorant and has false opinions?
Theodorus
No, that is incredible, Socrates.
Socrates
And yet this is the predicament to which the doctrine that man is the measure of all things inevitably leads.
Theodorus
How so?
Socrates
When you have come to a decision in your own mind about something, and declare your opinion to me, this opinion is, according to his doctrine, true to you; let us grant that; but may not the rest of us sit in judgement on your decision, or do we always judge that your opinion is true?
Do not myriads of men on each occasion oppose their opinions to yours, believing that your judgement and belief are false?
Theodorus
Yes, by Zeus, Socrates, countless myriads in truth, as Homer says, and they give me all the trouble in the world.
Socrates
Well then, shall we say that in such a case your opinion is true to you but false to the myriads?
Theodorus
That seems to be the inevitable deduction.
Socrates
And what of Protagoras himself?
If neither he himself thought, nor people in general think, as indeed they do not, that man is the measure of all things, is it not inevitable that the "truth" which he wrote is true to no one?
But if he himself thought it was true, and people in general do not agree with him, in the first place you know that it is just so much more false than true as the number of those who do not believe it is greater than the number of those who do.
Theodorus
Necessarily, if it is to be true or false according to each individual opinion.
Socrates
Secondly, it involves this, which is a very pretty result; he concedes about his own opinion the truth of the opinion of those who disagree with him and think that his opinion is false, since he grants that the opinions of all men are true.
Theodorus
Certainly.
Socrates
Then would he not be conceding that his own opinion is false, if he grants that the opinion of those who think he is in error is true?
Theodorus
Necessarily.
Socrates
But the others do not concede that they are in error, do they?
Theodorus
No, they do not.
Socrates
And he, in turn, according to his writings, grants that this opinion also is true.
Theodorus
Evidently.
Socrates
Then all men, beginning with Protagoras, will dispute or rather, he will grant, after he once concedes that the opinion of the man who holds the opposite view is true even Protagoras himself, I say, will concede that neither a dog nor any casual man is a measure of anything whatsoever that he has not learned.
Is not that the case?
Theodorus
Yes.
Socrates
Then since the "truth" of Protagoras is disputed by all, it would be true to nobody, neither to anyone else nor to him.
Theodorus
I think, Socrates, we are running my friend too hard.
Socrates
But, my dear man, I do not see that we are running beyond what is right.
Most likely, though, he, being older, is wiser than we, and if, for example, he should emerge from the ground, here at our feet, if only as far as the neck, he would prove abundantly that I was making a fool of myself by my talk, in all probability, and you by agreeing with me; then he would sink down and be off at a run.
But we, I suppose, must depend on ourselves, such as we are, and must say just what we think.
And so now must we not say that everybody would agree that some men are wiser and some more ignorant than others?
Theodorus
Yes, I think at least we must.
Socrates
And do you think his doctrine might stand most firmly in the form in which we sketched it when defending Protagoras,
that most things hot, dry, sweet, and everything of that sort are to each person as they appear to him, and if Protagoras is to concede that there are cases in which one person excels another, he might be willing to say that in matters of health and disease not every woman or child or beast, for that matter knows what is wholesome for it and is able to cure itself, but in this point, if in any, one person excels another?
Theodorus
Yes, I think that is correct.
Socrates
And likewise in affairs of state, the honorable and disgraceful, the just and unjust, the pious and its opposite, are in truth to each state such as it thinks they are and as it enacts into law for itself, and in these matters no citizen and no state is wiser than another; but in making laws that are advantageous to the state, or the reverse, Protagoras again will agree that one counsellor is better than another, and the opinion of one state better than that of another as regards the truth, and he would by no means dare to affirm that whatsoever laws a state makes in the belief that they will be advantageous to itself are perfectly sure to prove advantageous.
But in the other class of things I mean just and unjust, pious and impious they are willing to say with confidence that no one of them possesses by nature an existence of its own; on the contrary, that the common opinion becomes true at the time when it is adopted and remains true as long as it is held; this is substantially the theory of those who do not altogether affirm the doctrine of Protagoras.
But, Theodorus, argument after argument, a greater one after a lesser, is overtaking us.
Theodorus
Well, Socrates, we have plenty of leisure, have we not?
Socrates
Apparently we have.
And that makes me think, my friend, as I have often done before, how natural it is that those who have spent a long time in the study of philosophy appear ridiculous when they enter the courts of law as speakers.
Theodorus
What do you mean?
Socrates
Those who have knocked about in courts and the like from their youth up seem to me, when compared with those who have been brought up in philosophy and similar pursuits, to be as slaves in breeding compared with freemen.
Theodorus
In what way is this the case?
Socrates
In this way: the latter always have that which you just spoke of, leisure, and they talk at their leisure in peace;
just as we are now taking up argument after argument, already beginning a third, so can they, if as in our case, the new one pleases them better than that in which they are engaged; and they do not care at all whether their talk is long or short, if only they attain the truth.
But the men of the other sort are always in a hurry for the water flowing through the water-clock urges them on and the other party in the suit does not permit them to talk about anything they please, but stands over them exercising the law's compulsion by reading the brief, from which no deviation is allowed (this is called the affidavit);
and their discourse is always about a fellow slave and is addressed to a master who sits there holding some case or other in his hands; and the contests never run an indefinite course, but are always directed to the point at issue, and often the race is for the defendant's life.
As a result of all this, the speakers become tense and shrewd; they know how to wheedle their master with words and gain his favor by acts; but in their souls they become small and warped.
For they have been deprived of growth and straightforwardness and independence by the slavery they have endured from their youth up, for this forces them to do crooked acts by putting a great burden of fears and dangers upon their souls while these are still tender; and since they cannot bear this burden with uprightness and truth, they turn forthwith to deceit and to requiting wrong with wrong, so that they become greatly bent and stunted.
Consequently they pass from youth to manhood with no soundness of mind in them, but they think they have become clever and wise.
So much for them, Theodorus.
Shall we describe those who belong to our band, or shall we let that go and return to the argument, in order to avoid abuse of that freedom and variety of discourse, of which we were speaking just now?
Theodorus
By all means, Socrates, describe them;
for I like your saying that we who belong to this band are not the servants of our arguments, but the arguments are, as it were, our servants, and each of them must await our pleasure to be finished; for we have neither judge, nor, as the poets have, any spectator set over us to censure and rule us.
Socrates
Very well, that is quite appropriate, since it is your wish; and let us speak of the leaders; for why should anyone talk about the inferior philosophers?
The leaders, in the first place, from their youth up, remain ignorant of the way to the agora, do not even know where the court-room is, or the senate-house, or any other public place of assembly; as for laws and decrees, they neither hear the debates upon them nor see them when they are published; and the strivings of political clubs after public offices, and meetings, and banquets, and revellings with chorus girls it never occurs to them even in their dreams to indulge in such things.
And whether anyone in the city is of high or low birth, or what evil has been inherited by anyone from his ancestors, male or female, are matters to which they pay no more attention than to the number of pints in the sea, as the saying is.
And all these things the philosopher does not even know that he does not know;
for he does not keep aloof from them for the sake of gaining reputation, but really it is only his body that has its place and home in the city; his mind, considering all these things petty and of no account, disdains them and is borne in all directions, as Pindar says,
"both below the earth," and measuring the surface of the earth, and "above the sky," studying the stars, and investigating the universal nature of every thing that is, each in its entirety, never lowering itself to anything close at hand.
Theodorus
What do you mean by this, Socrates?
Socrates
Why, take the case of Thales, Theodorus.
While he was studying the stars and looking upwards, he fell into a pit, and a neat, witty Thracian servant girl jeered at him, they say, because he was so eager to know the things in the sky that he could not see what was there before him at his very feet.
The same jest applies to all who pass their lives in philosophy.
For really such a man pays no attention to his next door neighbor; he is not only ignorant of what he is doing, but he hardly knows whether he is a human being or some other kind of a creature; but what a human being is and what is proper for such a nature to do or bear different from any other, this he inquires and exerts himself to find out.
Do you understand, Theodorus, or not?
Theodorus
Yes, I do; you are right.
Socrates
Hence it is, my friend, such a man, both in private, when he meets with individuals, and in public, as I said in the beginning, when he is obliged to speak in court or elsewhere about the things at his feet and before his eyes,
is a laughing-stock not only to Thracian girls but to the multitude in general, for he falls into pits and all sorts of perplexities through inexperience, and his awkwardness is terrible, making him seem a fool; for when it comes to abusing people he has no personal abuse to offer against anyone, because he knows no evil of any man, never having cared for such things;
so his perplexity makes him appear ridiculous;
and as to laudatory speeches and the boastings of others, it becomes manifest that he is laughing at them not pretending to laugh, but really laughing and so he is thought to be a fool.
When he hears a panegyric of a despot or a king he fancies he is listening to the praises of some herdsman a swineherd, a shepherd, or a neatherd, for instance who gets much milk from his beasts; but he thinks that the ruler tends and milks a more perverse and treacherous creature than the herdsmen, and that he must grow coarse and uncivilized, no less than they, for he has no leisure and lives surrounded by a wall, as the herdsmen live in their mountain pens.
And when he hears that someone is amazingly rich, because he owns ten thousand acres of land or more, to him, accustomed as he is to think of the whole earth, this seems very little.
And when people sing the praises of lineage and say someone is of noble birth, because he can show seven wealthy ancestors, he thinks that such praises betray an altogether dull and narrow vision on the part of those who utter them;
because of lack of education they cannot keep their eyes fixed upon the whole and are unable to calculate that every man has had countless thousands of ancestors and progenitors, among whom have been in any instance rich and poor, kings and slaves, barbarians and Greeks.
And when people pride themselves on a list of twenty-five ancestors and trace their pedigree back to Heracles, the son of Amphitryon, the pettiness of their ideas seems absurd to him; he laughs at them because they cannot free their silly minds of vanity by calculating that Amphitryon's twenty-fifth ancestor was such as fortune happened to make him, and the fiftieth for that matter.
In all these cases the philosopher is derided by the common herd, partly because he seems to be contemptuous, partly because he is ignorant of common things and is always in perplexity.
Theodorus
That all happens just as you say, Socrates.
Socrates
But when, my friend, he draws a man upwards and the other is willing to rise with him above the level of "What wrong have I done you or you me?"
to the investigation of abstract right and wrong, to inquire what each of them is and wherein they differ from each other and from all other things, or above the level of "Is a king happy?"
or, on the other hand, "Has he great wealth?"
to royalty and of human happiness and wretchedness in general, to see what the nature of each is and in what way man is naturally fitted to gain the one and escape the other when that man of small and sharp and pettifogging mind is compelled in his turn to give an account of all these things, then the tables are turned; dizzied by the new experience of hanging at such a height, he gazes downward from the air in dismay and perplexity;
he stammers and becomes ridiculous, not in the eyes of Thracian girls or other uneducated persons, for they have no perception of it, but in those of all men who have been brought up as free men, not as slaves.
Such is the character of each of the two classes, Theodorus, of the man who has truly been brought up in freedom and leisure, whom you call a philosopher who may without censure appear foolish and good for nothing when he is involved in menial services, if, for instance, he does not know how to pack up his bedding, much less to put the proper sweetening into a sauce or a fawning speech and of the other,
who can perform all such services smartly and quickly, but does not know how to wear his cloak as a freeman should, properly draped, still less to acquire the true harmony of speech and hymn aright the praises of the true life of gods and blessed men.
Theodorus
If, Socrates, you could persuade all men of the truth of what you say as you do me, there would be more peace and fewer evils among mankind.
Socrates
But it is impossible that evils should be done away with, Theodorus, for there must always be something opposed to the good; and they cannot have their place among the gods, but must inevitably hover about mortal nature and this earth.
Therefore we ought to try to escape from earth to the dwelling of the gods as quickly as we can;
and to escape is to become like God, so far as this is possible;
and to become like God is to become righteous and holy and wise.
But, indeed, my good friend, it is not at all easy to persuade people that the reason generally advanced for the pursuit of virtue and the avoidance of vice namely, in order that a man may not seem bad and may seem good is not the reason why the one should be practiced and the other not; that, I think, is merely old wives' chatter, as the saying is.
Let us give the true reason.
God is in no wise and in no manner unrighteous, but utterly and perfectly righteous, and there is nothing so like him as that one of us who in turn becomes most nearly perfect in righteousness.
It is herein that the true cleverness of a man is found and also his worthlessness and cowardice;
for the knowledge of this is wisdom or true virtue, and ignorance of it is folly or manifest wickedness; and all the other kinds of seeming cleverness and wisdom are paltry when they appear in public affairs and vulgar in the arts.
Therefore by far the best thing for the unrighteous man and the man whose words or deeds are impious is not to grant that he is clever through knavery; for such men glory in that reproach, and think it means that they are not triflers, "useless burdens upon the earth," but such as men should be who are to live safely in a state.
So we must tell them the truth that just because they do not think they are such as they are, they are so all the more truly; for they do not know the penalty of unrighteousness, which is the thing they most ought to know.
For it is not what they think it is scourgings and death, which they sometimes escape entirely when they have done wrong but a penalty which it is impossible to escape.
Theodorus
What penalty do you mean?
Socrates
Two patterns, my friend, are set up in the world, the divine, which is most blessed, and the godless, which is most wretched.
But these men do not see that this is the case, and their silliness and extreme foolishness blind them to the fact that through their unrighteous acts they are made like the one and unlike the other.
They therefore pay the penalty for this by living a life that conforms to the pattern they resemble; and if we tell them that, unless they depart from their "cleverness," the blessed place that is pure of all things evil will not receive them after death, and here on earth they will always live the life like themselves evil men associating with evil when they hear this, they will be so confident in their unscrupulous cleverness that they will think our words the talk of fools.
Theodorus
Very true, Socrates.
Socrates
Yes, my friend, I know.
However, there is one thing that has happened to them: whenever they have to carry on a personal argument about the doctrines to which they object, if they are willing to stand their ground for a while like men and do not run away like cowards, then, my friend, they at last become strangely dissatisfied with themselves and their arguments; their brilliant rhetoric withers away, so that they seem no better than children.
But this is a digression.
Let us turn away from these matters if we do not, they will come on like an ever-rising flood and bury in silt our original argument and let us, if you please, proceed.
Theodorus
To me, Socrates, such digressions are quite as agreeable as the argument; for they are easier for a man of my age to follow.
However, if you prefer, let us return to our argument.
Socrates
Very well, we were at about the point in our argument where we said that those who declare that only motion is reality, and that whatever seems to each man really is to him to whom it seems, are willing to maintain their position in regard to other matters and to maintain especially in regard to justice that whatever laws a state makes, because they seem to it just, are just to the state that made them, as long as they remain in force; but as regards the good, that nobody has the courage to go on and contend that whatever laws a state passes thinking them advantageous to it are really advantageous as long as they remain in force, unless what he means is merely the name "advantageous"; and that would be making a joke of our argument.
Am I right?
Theodorus
Certainly.
Socrates
Yes; for he must not mean merely the name, but the thing named must be the object of his attention.
Theodorus
True.
Socrates
But the state, in making laws, aims, of course, at advantage, whatever the name it gives it, and makes all its laws as advantageous as possible to itself, to the extent of its belief and ability; or has it in making laws anything else in view?
Theodorus
Certainly not.
Socrates
And does it always hit the mark, or does every state often miss it?
Theodorus
I should say they do often miss it!
Socrates
Continuing, then, and proceeding from this point, every one would more readily agree to this assertion, if the question were asked concerning the whole class to which the advantageous belongs; and that whole class, it would seem, pertains to the future.
For when we make laws, we make them with the idea that they will be advantageous in after time; and this is rightly called the future.
Theodorus
Certainly.
Socrates
Come then, on this assumption, let us question Protagoras or someone of those who agree with him.
Man is the measure of all things, as your school says, Protagoras, of the white, the heavy, the light, everything of that sort without exception; for he possesses within himself the standard by which to judge them, and when his thoughts about them coincide with his sensations, he thinks what to him is true and really is.
Is not that what they say?
Theodorus
Yes.
Socrates
Does he, then, also, Protagoras, we shall say, possess within himself the standard by which to judge of the things which are yet to be, and do those things which he thinks will be actually come to pass for him who thought them?
Take, for instance, heat; if some ordinary man thinks he is going to take a fever, that is to say, that this particular heat will be, and some other man, who is a physician, thinks the contrary, whose opinion shall we expect the future to prove right?
Or perhaps the opinion of both, and the man will become, not hot or feverish to the physician, but to himself both?
Theodorus
No, that would be ridiculous.
Socrates
But, I imagine, in regard to the sweetness or dryness which will be in a wine, the opinion of the husbandman, not that of the lyre-player, will be valid.
Theodorus
Of course.
Socrates
And again, in a matter of discord or tunefulness in music that has never been played, a gymnastic teacher could not judge better than a musician what will, when performed, seem tuneful even to a gymnastic teacher himself.
Theodorus
Certainly not.
Socrates
Then, too, when a banquet is in preparation the opinion of him who is to be a guest, unless he has training in cookery, is of less value concerning the pleasure that will be derived from the viands than that of the cook.
For we need not yet argue about that which already is or has been pleasant to each one but concerning that which will in the future seem and be pleasant to each one, is he himself the best judge for himself, or would you, Protagoras at least as regards the arguments which will be persuasive in court to each of us be able to give an opinion beforehand better than anyone whatsoever who has no especial training?
Theodorus
Certainly, Socrates, in this, at any rate, he used to declare emphatically that he himself excelled everyone.
Socrates
Yes, my friend, he certainly did; otherwise nobody would have paid him a high fee for his conversations, if he had not made his pupils believe that neither a prophet nor anyone else could judge better than himself what was in the future to be and seem.
Theodorus
Very true.
Socrates
Both lawmaking, then, and the advantageous are concerned with the future, and everyone would agree that a state in making laws must often fail to attain the greatest advantage?
Theodorus
Assuredly.
Socrates
Then it will be a fair answer if we say to your master that he is obliged to agree that one man is wiser than another, and that such a wise man is a measure, but that I, who am without knowledge, am not in the least obliged to become a measure, as the argument in his behalf just now tried to oblige me to be, whether I would or no.
Theodorus
In that respect, Socrates, I think that the argument is most clearly proved to be wrong, and it is proved wrong in this also, in that it declares the opinions of others to be valid, whereas it was shown that they do not consider his arguments true at all.
Socrates
In many other respects, Theodorus, it could be proved that not every opinion of every person is true, at any rate in matters of that kind; but it is more difficult to prove that opinions are not true in regard to the momentary states of feeling of each person, from which our perceptions and the opinions concerning them arise.
But perhaps I am quite wrong;
for it may be impossible to prove that they are not true, and those who say that they are manifest and are forms of knowledge may perhaps be right, and Theaetetus here was not far from the mark in saying that perception and knowledge are identical.
So we must, as the argument in behalf of Protagoras enjoined upon us, come up closer and examine this doctrine of motion as the fundamental essence, rapping on it to see whether it rings sound or unsound.
So a strife has arisen about it, no mean one, either, and waged by not a few combatants.
Theodorus
Yes, far from mean, and it is spreading far and wide all over Ionia;
for the disciples of Heracleitus are supporting this doctrine very vigorously.
Socrates
Therefore, my dear Theodorus, we must all the more examine it from the beginning as they themselves present it.
Theodorus
Certainly we must.
For it is no more possible, Socrates, to discuss these doctrines of Heracleitus (or, as you say, of Homer or even earlier sages) with the Ephesians themselves those, at least, who profess to be familiar with them than with madmen.
For they are, quite in accordance with their text-books, in perpetual motion; but as for keeping to an argument or a question and quietly answering and asking in turn, their power of doing that is less than nothing; or rather the words "nothing at all" fail to express the absence from these fellows of even the slightest particle of rest.
But if you ask one of them a question, he pulls out puzzling little phrases, like arrows from a quiver, and shoots them off; and if you try to get hold of an explanation of what he has said, you will be struck with another phrase of novel and distorted wording,
and you never make any progress whatsoever with any of them, nor do they themselves with one another, for that matter, but they take very good care to allow nothing to be settled either in an argument or in their own minds, thinking, I suppose, that this is being stationary; but they wage bitter war against the stationary, and, so far as they can, they banish it altogether.
Socrates
Perhaps, Theodorus, you have seen the men when they are fighting, but have not been with them when they are at peace; for they are no friends of yours;
but I fancy they utter such peaceful doctrines at leisure to those pupils whom they wish to make like themselves.
Theodorus
What pupils, my good man?
Such people do not become pupils of one another, but they grow up of themselves, each one getting his inspiration from any chance source, and each thinks the other knows nothing.
From these people, then, as I was going to say, you would never get an argument either with their will or against it; but we must ourselves take over the question and investigate it as if it were a problem of mathematics.
Socrates
Yes, what you say is reasonable.
Now as for the problem, have we not heard from the ancients, who concealed their meaning from the multitude by their poetry, that the origin of all things is Oceanus and Tethys, flowing streams, and that nothing is at rest and likewise from the modern, who, since they are wiser, declare their meaning openly,
in order that even cobblers may hear and know their wisdom and may cease from the silly belief that some things are at rest and others in motion, and, after learning that everything is in motion, may honor their teachers?
But, Theodorus, I almost forgot that others teach the opposite of this, "So that it is motionless, the name of which is the All,"
and all the other doctrines maintained by Melissus and Parmenides and the rest, in opposition to all these they maintain that everything is one and is stationary within itself, having no place in which to move.
What shall we do with all these people, my friend?
For, advancing little by little, we have unwittingly fallen between the two parties, and, unless we protect ourselves and escape somehow, we shall pay the penalty, like those in the palaestra, who in playing on the line are caught by both sides and dragged in opposite directions.
I think, then, we had better examine first the one party, those whom we originally set out to join, the flowing ones, and if we find their arguments sound, we will help them to pull us over, trying thus to escape the others; but if we find that the partisans of "the whole" seem to have truer doctrines, we will take refuge with them from those who would move what is motionless.
But if we find that neither party has anything reasonable to say, we shall be ridiculous if we think that we, who are of no account, can say anything worth while after having rejected the doctrines of very ancient and very wise men.
Therefore, Theodorus, see whether it is desirable to go forward into so great a danger.
Theodorus
Oh, it would be unendurable, Socrates, not to examine thoroughly the doctrines of both parties.
Socrates
Then they must be examined, since you are so urgent.
Now I think the starting-point of our examination of the doctrine of motion is this: Exactly what do they mean, after all, when they say that all things are in motion?
What I wish to ask is this: Do they mean to say that there is only one kind of motion or, as I believe, two?
But it must not be my belief alone; you must share it also, that if anything happens to us we may suffer it in common.
Tell me, do you call it motion when a thing changes its place or turns round in the same place?
Theodorus
Yes.
Socrates
Let this, then, be one kind of motion.
Now when a thing remains in the same place, but grows old, or becomes black instead of white, or hard instead of soft, or undergoes any other kind of alteration, is it not proper to say that this is another kind of motion?
Theodorus
I think so.
Socrates
So I say that there are these two kinds of motion: "alteration," and "motion in space."
Theodorus
And you are right.
Socrates
Now that we have made this distinction, let us at once converse with those who say that all things are in motion, and let us ask them, "Do you mean that everything moves in both ways, moving in space and undergoing alteration, or one thing in both ways and another in one of the two ways only?"
Theodorus
By Zeus, I cannot tell!
But I think they would say that everything moves in both ways.
Socrates
Yes; otherwise, my friend, they will find that things in motion are also things at rest, and it will be no more correct to say that all things are in motion than that all things are at rest.
Theodorus
What you say is very true.
Socrates
Then since they must be in motion, and since absence of motion must be impossible for anything, all things are always in all kinds of motion.
Theodorus
Necessarily.
Socrates
Then just examine this point of their doctrine.
Did we not find that they say that heat or whiteness or anything you please arises in some such way as this, namely that each of these moves simultaneously with perception between the active and the passive element, and the passive becomes percipient, but not perception, and the active becomes, not a quality, but endowed with a quality?
Now perhaps quality seems an extraordinary word, and you do not understand it when used with general application, so let me give particular examples.
For the active element becomes neither heat nor whiteness, but hot or white, and other things in the same way; you probably remember that this was what we said earlier in our discourse, that nothing is in itself unvaryingly one, neither the active nor the passive, but from the union of the two with one another the perceptions and the perceived give birth and the latter become things endowed with some quality while the former become percipient.
Theodorus
I remember, of course.
Socrates
Let us then pay no attention to other matters, whether they teach one thing or another; but let us attend strictly to this only, which is the object of our discussion.
Let us ask them, "Are all things, according to your doctrine, in motion and flux?"
Is that so?
Theodorus
Yes.
Socrates
Have they then both kinds of motion which we distinguished?
Are they moving in space and also undergoing alteration?
Theodorus
Of course;
that is, if they are to be in perfect motion.
Socrates
Then if they moved only in space, but did not undergo alteration, we could perhaps say what qualities belong to those moving things which are in flux, could we not?
Theodorus
That is right.
Socrates
But since not even this remains fixed that the thing in flux flows white, but changes, so that there is a flux of the very whiteness, and a change of color, that it may not in that way be convicted of remaining fixed, is it possible to give any name to a color, and yet to speak accurately?
Theodorus
How can it be possible, Socrates,
or to give a name to anything else of this sort, if while we are speaking it always evades us, being, as it is, in flux?
Socrates
But what shall we say of any of the perceptions, such as seeing or hearing?
Does it perhaps remain fixed in the condition of seeing or hearing?
Theodorus
It must be impossible, if all things are in motion.
Socrates
Then we must not speak of seeing more than not seeing, or of any other perception more than of non-perception, if all things are in all kinds of motion.
Theodorus
No, we must not.
Socrates
And yet perception is knowledge, as Theaetetus and I said.
Theodorus
Yes, you did say that.
Socrates
Then when we were asked "what is knowledge?" we answered no more what knowledge is than what not-knowledge is.
Theodorus
So it seems.
Socrates
This would be a fine result of the correction of our answer, when we were so eager to show that all things are in motion, just for the purpose of making that answer prove to be correct.
But this, I think, did prove to be true, that if all things are in motion, every answer to any question whatsoever is equally correct, and we may say it is thus or not thus or, if you prefer, "becomes thus," to avoid giving them fixity by using the word "is."
Theodorus
You are right.
Socrates
Except, Theodorus, that I said "thus," and "not thus"; but we ought not even to say "thus";
for "thus" would no longer be in motion; nor, again, "not thus."
For there is no motion in "this" either; but some other expression must be supplied for those who maintain this doctrine, since now they have, according to their own hypothesis, no words, unless it be perhaps the word "nohow."
That might be most fitting for them, since it is indefinite.
Theodorus
At any rate that is the most appropriate form of speech for them.
Socrates
So, Theodorus, we have got rid of your friend, and we do not yet concede to him that every man is a measure of all things, unless he be a sensible man; and we are not going to concede that knowledge is perception, at least not by the theory of universal motion, unless Theaetetus here has something different to say.
Theodorus
An excellent idea, Socrates; for now that this matter is settled, I too should be rid of the duty of answering your questions according to our agreement, since the argument about Protagoras is ended.
Theaetetus
No, Theodorus, not until you and Socrates have discussed those who say all things are at rest, as you proposed just now.
Theodorus
A young man like you, Theaetetus, teaching your elders to do wrong by breaking their agreements!
No; prepare to answer Socrates yourself for the rest of the argument.
Theaetetus
I will if he wishes it.
But I should have liked best to hear about the doctrine I mentioned.
Theodorus
Calling Socrates to an argument is calling cavalry into an open plain.
Just ask him a question and you shall hear.
Socrates
Still I think, Theodorus, I shall not comply with the request of Theaetetus.
Theodorus
Why will you not comply with it?
Socrates
Because I have a reverential fear of examining in a flippant manner Melissus and the others who teach that the universe is one and motionless, and because I reverence still more one man, Parmenides.
Parmenides seems to me to be, in Homer's words, "one to be venerated" and also "awful."
For I met him when I was very young and he was very old, and he appeared to me to possess an absolutely noble depth of mind.
So I am afraid we may not understand his words and may be still farther from understanding what he meant by them;
but my chief fear is that the question with which we started, about the nature of knowledge, may fail to be investigated, because of the disorderly crowd of arguments which will burst in upon us if we let them in; especially as the argument we are now proposing is of vast extent, and would not receive its deserts if we treated it as a side issue, and if we treat it as it deserves, it will take so long as to do away with the discussion about knowledge.
Neither of these things ought to happen, but we ought to try by the science of midwifery to deliver Theaetetus of the thoughts about knowledge with which he is pregnant.
Theodorus
Yes, if that is your opinion, we ought to do so.
Socrates
Consider, then, Theaetetus, this further point about what has been said.
Now you answered that perception is knowledge, did you not?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
If, then, anyone should ask you, "By what does a man see white and black colors and by what does he hear high and low tones?"
you would, I fancy, say, "By his eyes and ears."
Theaetetus
Yes, I should.
Socrates
The easy use of words and phrases and the avoidance of strict precision is in general a sign of good breeding; indeed, the opposite is hardly worthy of a gentleman, but sometimes it is necessary, as now it is necessary to object to your answer, in so far as it is incorrect.
Just consider; which answer is more correct, that our eyes are that by which we see or that through which we see, and our ears that by which or that through which we hear?
Theaetetus
I think, Socrates, we perceive through, rather than by them, in each case.
Socrates
Yes, for it would be strange indeed, my boy, if there are many senses ensconced within us, as if we were so many wooden horses of Troy, and they do not all unite in one power, whether we should call it soul or something else, by which we perceive through these as instruments the objects of perception.
Theaetetus
I think what you suggest is more likely than the other way.
Socrates
Now the reason why I am so precise about the matter is this: I want to know whether there is some one and the same power within ourselves by which we perceive black and white through the eyes, and again other qualities through the other organs, and whether you will be able, if asked, to refer all such activities to the body.
But perhaps it is better that you make the statement in answer to a question than that I should take all the trouble for you.
So tell me: do you not think that all the organs through which you perceive hot and hard and light and sweet are parts of the body?
Or are they parts of something else?
Theaetetus
Of nothing else.
Socrates
And will you also be ready to agree that it is impossible to perceive through one sense what you perceive through another; for instance, to perceive through sight what you perceive through hearing, or through hearing what you perceive through sight?
Theaetetus
Of course I shall.
Socrates
Then if you have any thought about both of these together, you would not have perception about both together either through one organ or through the other.
Theaetetus
No.
Socrates
Now in regard to sound and color, you have, in the first place, this thought about both of them, that they both exist?
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Socrates
And that each is different from the other and the same as itself?
Theaetetus
Of course.
Socrates
And that both together are two and each separately is one?
Theaetetus
Yes, that also.
Socrates
And are you able also to observe whether they are like or unlike each other?
Theaetetus
May be.
Socrates
Now through what organ do you think all this about them?
For it is impossible to grasp that which is common to them both either through hearing or through sight.
Here is further evidence for the point I am trying to make: if it were possible to investigate the question whether the two, sound and color, are bitter or not, you know that you will be able to tell by what faculty you will investigate it, and that is clearly neither hearing nor sight, but something else.
Theaetetus
Of course it is, the faculty exerted through the tongue.
Socrates
Very good.
But through what organ is the faculty exerted which makes known to you that which is common to all things, as well as to these of which we are speaking that which you call being and not-being, and the other attributes of things, about which we were asking just now?
What organs will you assign for all these, through which that part of us which perceives gains perception of each and all of them?
Theaetetus
You mean being and not-being, and likeness and unlikeness, and identity and difference, and also unity and plurality as applied to them.
And you are evidently asking also through what bodily organs we perceive by our soul the odd and the even and everything else that is in the same category.
Socrates
Bravo, Theaetetus!
you follow me exactly; that is just what I mean by my question.
Theaetetus
By Zeus, Socrates, I cannot answer, except that I think there is no special organ at all for these notions, as there are for those others; but it appears to me that the soul views by itself directly what all things have in common.
Socrates
Why, you are beautiful, Theaetetus, and not, as Theodorus said, ugly; for he who speaks beautifully is beautiful and good.
But besides being beautiful, you have done me a favor by relieving me from a long discussion, if you think that the soul views some things by itself directly and others through the bodily faculties;
for that was my own opinion, and I wanted you to agree.
Theaetetus
Well, I do think so.
Socrates
To which class, then, do you assign being;
for this, more than anything else, belongs to all things?
Theaetetus
I assign them to the class of notions which the soul grasps by itself directly.
Socrates
And also likeness and unlikeness and identity and difference?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
And how about beautiful and ugly, and good and bad?
Theaetetus
I think that these also are among the things the essence of which the soul most certainly views in their relations to one another, reflecting within itself upon the past and present in relation to the future.
Socrates
Stop there.
Does it not perceive the hardness of the hard through touch, and likewise the softness of the soft?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
But their essential nature and the fact that they exist, and their opposition to one another, and, in turn, the essential nature of this opposition, the soul itself tries to determine for us by reverting to them and comparing them with one another.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Socrates
Is it not true, then, that all sensations which reach the soul through the body, can be perceived by human beings, and also by animals, from the moment of birth; whereas reflections about these, with reference to their being and usefulness, are acquired, if at all, with difficulty and slowly, through many troubles, in other words, through education?
Theaetetus
Assuredly.
Socrates
Is it, then, possible for one to attain "truth" who cannot even get as far as "being"?
Theaetetus
No.
Socrates
And will a man ever have knowledge of anything the truth of which he fails to attain?
Theaetetus
How can he, Socrates?
Socrates
Then knowledge is not in the sensations, but in the process of reasoning about them; for it is possible, apparently, to apprehend being and truth by reasoning, but not by sensation.
Theaetetus
So it seems.
Socrates
Then will you call the two by the same name, when there are so great differences between them?
Theaetetus
No, that would certainly not be right.
Socrates
What name will you give, then, to the one which includes seeing, hearing, smelling, being cold, and being hot?
Theaetetus
Perceiving.
What other name can I give it?
Socrates
Collectively you call it, then, perception?
Theaetetus
Of course.
Socrates
By which, we say, we are quite unable to apprehend truth, since we cannot apprehend being, either.
Theaetetus
No; certainly not.
Socrates
Nor knowledge either, then.
Theaetetus
No.
Socrates
Then, Theaetetus, perception and knowledge could never be the same.
Theaetetus
Evidently not, Socrates;
and indeed now at last it has been made perfectly clear that knowledge is something different from perception.
Socrates
But surely we did not begin our conversation in order to find out what knowledge is not, but what it is.
However, we have progressed so far, at least, as not to seek for knowledge in perception at all, but in some function of the soul, whatever name is given to it when it alone and by itself is engaged directly with realities.
Theaetetus
That, Socrates, is, I suppose, called having opinion.
Socrates
You suppose rightly, my friend.
Now begin again at the beginning.
Wipe out all we said before, and see if you have any clearer vision, now that you have advanced to this point.
Say once more what knowledge is.
Theaetetus
To say that all opinion is knowledge is impossible, Socrates, for there is also false opinion; but true opinion probably is knowledge.
Let that be my answer.
For if it is proved to be wrong as we proceed, I will try to give another, just as I have given this.
Socrates
That is the right way, Theaetetus.
It is better to speak up boldly than to hesitate about answering, as you did at first.
For if we act in this way, one of two things will happen: either we shall find what we are after, or we shall be less inclined to think we know what we do not know at all; and surely even that would be a recompense not to be despised.
Well, then, what do you say now?
Assuming that there are two kinds of opinion, one true and the other false, do you define knowledge as the true opinion?
Theaetetus
Yes.
That now seems to me to be correct.
Socrates
Is it, then, still worth while, in regard to opinion, to take up again ?
Theaetetus
What point do you refer to?
Socrates
Somehow I am troubled now and have often been troubled before, so that I have been much perplexed in my own reflections and in talking with others, because I cannot tell what this experience is which we human beings have, and how it comes about.
Theaetetus
What experience?
Socrates
That anyone has false opinions.
And so I am considering and am still in doubt whether we had better let it go or examine it by another method than the one we followed a while ago.
Theaetetus
Why not, Socrates, if there seems to be the least need of it?
For just now, in talking about leisure, you and Theodorus said very truly that there is no hurry in discussions of this sort.
Socrates
You are right in reminding me.
For perhaps this is a good time to retrace our steps.
For it is better to finish a little task well than a great deal imperfectly.
Theaetetus
Of course.
Socrates
How, then, shall we set about it?
What is it that we do say?
Do we say that in every case of opinion there is a false opinion, and one of us has a false, and another a true opinion, because, as we believe, it is in the nature of things that this should be so?
Theaetetus
Yes, we do.
Socrates
Then this, at any rate, is possible for us, is it not, regarding all things collectively and each thing separately, either to know or not to know them?
For learning and forgetting, as intermediate stages, I leave out of account for the present, for just now they have no bearing upon our argument.
Theaetetus
Certainly, Socrates, nothing is left in any particular case except knowing or not knowing it.
Socrates
Then he who forms opinion must form opinion either about what he knows or about what he does not know?
Theaetetus
Necessarily.
Socrates
And it is surely impossible that one who knows a thing does not know it, or that one who does not know it knows it.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Socrates
Then does he who forms false opinions think that the things which he knows are not these things, but some others of the things he knows, and so, knowing both, is he ignorant of both?
Theaetetus
That is impossible, Socrates.
Socrates
Well then, does he think that the things he does not know are other things which he does not know which is as if a man who knows neither Theaetetus nor Socrates should conceive the idea that Socrates is Theaetetus or Theaetetus Socrates?
Theaetetus
That is impossible.
Socrates
But surely a man does not think that the things he knows are the things he does not know, or again that the things he does not know are the things he knows.
Theaetetus
That would be a monstrous absurdity.
Socrates
Then how could he still form false opinions?
For inasmuch as all things are either known or unknown to us, it is impossible, I imagine, to form opinions outside of these alternatives, and within them it is clear that there is no place for fake opinion.
Theaetetus
Very true.
Socrates
Had we, then, better look for what we are seeking, not by this method of knowing and not knowing, but by that of being and not being?
Theaetetus
What do you mean?
Socrates
We may simply assert that he who on any subject holds opinions which are not, will certainly think falsely, no matter what the condition of his mind may be in other respects.
Theaetetus
That, again, is likely, Socrates.
Socrates
Well then, what shall we say, Theaetetus, if anyone asks us, "Is that which is assumed in common speech possible at all, and can any human being hold an opinion which is not, whether it be concerned with any of the things which are, or be entirely independent of them?"
We, I fancy, shall reply, "Yes, when, in thinking, he thinks what is not true," shall we not?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
And is the same sort of thing possible in any other field?
Theaetetus
What sort of thing?
Socrates
For instance, that a man sees something, but sees nothing.
Theaetetus
How can he?
Socrates
Yet surely if a man sees any one thing, he sees something that is.
Or do you, perhaps, think "one" is among the things that are not?
Theaetetus
No, I do not.
Socrates
Then he who sees any one thing, sees something that is.
Theaetetus
That is clear.
Socrates
And therefore he who hears anything, hears some one thing and therefore hears what is.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
And he who touches anything, touches some one thing, which is, since it is one?
Theaetetus
That also is true.
Socrates
So, then, does not he who holds an opinion hold an opinion of some one thing?
Theaetetus
He must do so.
Socrates
And does not he who holds an opinion of some one thing hold an opinion of something that is?
Theaetetus
I agree.
Socrates
Then he who holds an opinion of what is not holds an opinion of nothing.
Theaetetus
Evidently.
Socrates
Well then, he who holds an opinion of nothing, holds no opinion at all.
Theaetetus
That is plain, apparently.
Socrates
Then it is impossible to hold an opinion of that which is not, either in relation to things that are, or independently of them.
Theaetetus
Evidently.
Socrates
Then holding false opinion is something different from holding an opinion of that which is not?
Theaetetus
So it seems.
Socrates
Then false opinion is not found to exist in us either by this method or by that which we followed a little while ago.
Theaetetus
No, it certainly is not.
Socrates
But does not that which we call by that name arise after the following manner?
Theaetetus
After what manner?
Socrates
We say that false opinion is a kind of interchanged opinion, when a person makes an exchange in his mind and says that one thing which exists is another thing which exists.
For in this way he always holds an opinion of what exists, but of one thing instead of another; so he misses the object he was aiming at in his thought and might fairly be said to hold a false opinion.
Theaetetus
Now you seem to me to have said what is perfectly right.
For when a man, in forming an opinion, puts ugly instead of beautiful, or beautiful instead of ugly, he does truly hold a false opinion.
Socrates
Evidently, Theaetetus, you feel contempt of me, and not fear.
Theaetetus
Why in the world do you say that?
Socrates
You think, I fancy, that I would not attack your "truly false" by asking whether it is possible for a thing to become slowly quick or heavily light, or any other opposite, by a process opposite to itself, in accordance, not with its own nature, but with that of its opposite.
But I let this pass, that your courage may not fail.
You are satisfied, you say, that false opinion is interchanged opinion?
Theaetetus
I am.
Socrates
It is, then, in your opinion, possible for the mind to regard one thing as another and not as what it is.
Theaetetus
Yes, it is.
Socrates
Now when one's mind does this, does it not necessarily have a thought either of both things together or of one or the other of them?
Theaetetus
Yes, it must; either of both at the same time or in succession.
Socrates
Excellent.
And do you define thought as I do?
Theaetetus
How do you define it?
Socrates
As the talk which the soul has with itself about any subjects which it considers.
You must not suppose that I know this that I am declaring to you.
But the soul, as the image presents itself to me, when it thinks, is merely conversing with itself, asking itself questions and answering, affirming and denying.
When it has arrived at a decision, whether slowly or with a sudden bound, and is at last agreed, and is not in doubt, we call that its opinion;
and so I define forming opinion as talking and opinion as talk which has been held, not with someone else, nor yet aloud, but in silence with oneself.
How do you define it?
Theaetetus
In the same way.
Socrates
Then whenever a man has an opinion that one thing is another, he says to himself, we believe, that the one thing is the other.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Socrates
Now call to mind whether you have ever said to yourself that the beautiful is most assuredly ugly, or the wrong right,
or and this is the sum of the whole matter consider whether you have ever tried to persuade yourself that one thing is most assuredly another, or whether quite the contrary is the case, and you have never ventured, even in sleep, to say to yourself that the odd is, after all, certainly even, or anything of that sort.
Theaetetus
You are right.
Socrates
Do you imagine that anyone else, sane or insane, ever ventured to say to himself seriously and try to persuade himself that the ox must necessarily be a horse, or two one?
Theaetetus
No, by Zeus, I do not.
Socrates
Then if forming opinion is talking to oneself, no one who talks and forms opinion of two objects and apprehends them both with his soul, could say and have the opinion that one is the other.
But you will also have to give up the expression "one and other."
This is what I mean, that nobody holds the opinion that the ugly is beautiful, or anything of that sort.
Theaetetus
Well, Socrates, I do give it up; and I agree with you in what you say.
Socrates
You agree, therefore, that he who holds an opinion of both things cannot hold the opinion that one is the other.
Theaetetus
So it seems.
Socrates
But surely he who holds an opinion of one only, and not of the other at all, will never hold the opinion that one is the other.
Theaetetus
You are right; for he would be forced to apprehend also that of which he holds no opinion.
Socrates
Then neither he who holds opinion of both nor he who holds it of one can hold the opinion that a thing is something else.
And so anyone who sets out to define false opinion as interchanged opinion would be talking nonsense.
Then neither by this method nor by our previous methods is false opinion found to exist in us.
Theaetetus
Apparently not.
Socrates
But yet, Theaetetus, if this is found not to exist, we shall be forced to admit many absurdities.
Theaetetus
What absurdities?
Socrates
I will not tell you until I have tried to consider the matter in every way.
For I should be ashamed of us, if, in our perplexity, we were forced to make such admissions as those to which I refer.
But if we find the object of our quest, and are set free from perplexity, then, and not before, we will speak of others as involved in those absurdities, and we ourselves shall stand free from ridicule.
But if we find no escape from our perplexity, we shall, I fancy, become low-spirited, like seasick people, and shall allow the argument to trample on us and do to us anything it pleases.
Hear, then, by what means I still see a prospect of success for our quest.
Theaetetus
Do speak.
Socrates
I shall deny that we were right when we agreed that it is impossible for a man to have opinion that the things he does not know are the things which he knows, and thus to be deceived.
But there is a way in which it is possible.
Theaetetus
Do you mean what I myself suspected when we made the statement to which you refer, that sometimes I, though I know Socrates, saw at a distance someone whom I did not know, and thought it was Socrates whom I do know?
In such a case false opinion does arise.
Socrates
But did not we reject that, because it resulted in our knowing and not knowing the things which we know?
Theaetetus
Certainly we did.
Socrates
Let us, then, not make that assumption, but another; perhaps it will turn out well for us, perhaps the opposite.
But we are in such straits that we must turn every argument round and test it from all sides.
Now see if this is sensible:
Can a man who did not know a thing at one time learn it later?
Theaetetus
To be sure he can.
Socrates
Again, then, can he learn one thing after another?
Theaetetus
Why not?
Socrates
Please assume, then, for the sake of argument, that there is in our souls a block of wax, in one case larger, in another smaller, in one case the wax is purer, in another more impure and harder, in some cases softer, and in some of proper quality.
Theaetetus
I assume all that.
Socrates
Let us, then, say that this is the gift of Memory, the mother of the Muses, and that whenever we wish to remember anything we see or hear or think of in our own minds, we hold this wax under the perceptions and thoughts and imprint them upon it, just as we make impressions from seal rings; and whatever is imprinted we remember and know as long as its image lasts, but whatever is rubbed out or cannot be imprinted we forget and do not know.
Theaetetus
Let us assume that.
Socrates
Now take a man who knows the things which he sees and hears, and is considering some one of them; observe whether he may not gain a false opinion in the following manner.
Theaetetus
In what manner?
Socrates
By thinking that the things which he knows are sometimes things which he knows and sometimes things which he does not know.
For we were wrong before in agreeing that this is impossible.
Theaetetus
What do you say about it now?
Socrates
We must begin our discussion of the matter by making the following distinctions: It is impossible for anyone to think that one thing which he knows and of which he has received a memorial imprint in his soul, but which he does not perceive, is another thing which he knows and of which also he has an imprint, and which he does not perceive.
And, again, he cannot think that what he knows is that which he does not know and of which he has no seal;
nor that what he does not know is another thing which he does not know; nor that what he does not know is what he knows; nor can he think that what he perceives is something else which he perceives; nor that what he perceives is something which he does not perceive; nor that what he does not perceive is something else which he does not perceive; nor that what he does not perceive is something which he perceives.
And, again, it is still more impossible, if that can be, to think that a thing which he knows and perceives and of which he has an imprint which accords with the perception is another thing which he knows and perceives and of which he has an imprint which accords with the perception.
And he cannot think that what he knows and perceives and of which he has a correct memorial imprint is another thing which he knows; nor that a thing which he knows and perceives and of which he has such an imprint is another thing which he perceives;
nor again that a thing which he neither knows nor perceives is another thing which he neither knows nor perceives;
nor that a thing which he neither knows nor perceives is another thing which he does not know;
nor that a thing which he neither knows nor perceives is another thing which he does not perceive.
In all these cases it is impossible beyond everything for false opinion to arise in the mind of anyone.
The possibility that it may arise remains, if anywhere, in the following cases.
Theaetetus
What cases are they?
I hope they may help me to understand better; for now I cannot follow you.
Socrates
The cases in which he may think that things which he knows are some other things which he knows and perceives; or which he does not know, but perceives; or that things which he knows and perceives are other things which he knows and perceives.
Theaetetus
Now I am even more out of the running than before.
Socrates
Then let me repeat it in a different way.
I know Theodorus and remember within myself what sort of a person he is, and just so I know Theaetetus, but sometimes I see them, and sometimes I do not, sometimes I touch them, sometimes not, sometimes I hear them or perceive them through some other sense, and sometimes I have no perception of you at all, but I remember you none the less and know you in my own mind.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Socrates
This, then, is the first of the points which I wish to make clear.
Note that one may perceive or not perceive that which one knows.
Theaetetus
That is true.
Socrates
So, too, with that which he does not know he may often not even perceive it, and often he may merely perceive it?
Theaetetus
That too is possible.
Socrates
See if you follow me better now.
If Socrates knows Theodorus and Theaetetus, but sees neither of them and has no other perception of them, he never could have the opinion within himself that Theaetetus is Theodorus.
Am I right or wrong?
Theaetetus
You are right.
Socrates
Now that was the first of the cases of which I spoke.
Theaetetus
Yes, it was.
Socrates
The second is this: knowing one of you and not knowing the other, and not perceiving either of you, I never could think that the one whom I know is the one whom I do not know.
Theaetetus
Right.
Socrates
And this is the third case: not knowing and not perceiving either of you, I could not think that he whom I do not know is someone else whom I do not know.
And imagine that you have heard all the other cases again in succession, in which I could never form false opinions about you and Theodorus, either when I know or do not know both of you, or when I know one and not the other; and the same is true if we say "perceive" instead of "know."
Do you follow me?
Theaetetus
I follow you.
Socrates
Then the possibility of forming false opinion remains in the following case: when, for example, knowing you and Theodorus, and having on that block of wax the imprint of both of you, as if you were signet-rings, but seeing you both at a distance and indistinctly, I hasten to assign the proper imprint of each of you to the proper vision, and to make it fit, as it were, its own footprint, with the purpose of causing recognition; but I may fail in this by interchanging them, and put the vision of one upon the imprint of the other, as people put a shoe on the wrong foot; or, again, I may be affected as the sight is affected when we use a mirror and the sight as it flows makes a change from right to left, and thus make a mistake; it is in such cases, then, that interchanged opinion occurs and the forming of false opinion arises.
Theaetetus
I think it does, Socrates.
You describe what happens to opinion marvelously well.
Socrates
There is still the further case, when, knowing both of you, I perceive one in addition to knowing him, but do not perceive the other, and the knowledge which I have of that other is not in accord with my perception.
This is the case I described in this way before, and at that time you did not understand me.
Theaetetus
No, I did not.
Socrates
This is what I meant, that if anyone knows and perceives one of you, and has knowledge of him which accords with the perception, he will never think that he is someone else whom he knows and perceives and his knowledge of whom accords with the perception.
That was the case, was it not?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
But we omitted, I believe, the case of which I am speaking now the case in which we say the false opinion arises: when a man knows both and sees both (or has some other perception of them), but fails to hold the two imprints each under its proper perception; like a bad archer he shoots beside the mark and misses it; and it is just this which is called error or deception.
Theaetetus
And properly so.
Socrates
Now when perception is present to one of the imprints but not to the other, and the mind applies the imprint of the absent perception to the perception which is present, the mind is deceived in every such instance.
In a word, if our present view is sound, false opinion or deception seems to be impossible in relation to things which one does not know and has never perceived; but it is precisely in relation to things which we know and perceive that opinion turns and twists, becoming false and true true when it puts the proper imprints and seals fairly and squarely upon one another, and false when it applies them sideways and aslant.
Theaetetus
Well, then, Socrates, is that view not a good one?
Socrates
After you have heard the rest, you will be still more inclined to say so.
For to hold a true opinion is a good thing, but to be deceived is a disgrace.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Socrates
They say the cause of these variations is as follows: When the wax in the soul of a man is deep and abundant and smooth and properly kneaded, the images that come through the perceptions are imprinted upon this heart of the soul as Homer calls it in allusion to its similarity to wax ; when this is the case, and in such men, the imprints, being clear and of sufficient depth, are also lasting.
And men of this kind are in the first place quick to learn, and secondly they have retentive memories, and moreover they do not interchange the imprints of their perceptions, but they have true opinions.
For the imprints are clear and have plenty of room, so that such men quickly assign them to their several moulds, which are called realities; and these men, then, are called wise.
Or do you not agree?
Theaetetus
Most emphatically.
Socrates
Now when the heart of anyone is shaggy (a condition which the all-wise poet commends), or when it is unclean or of impure wax, or very soft or hard, those whose wax is soft are quick to learn, but forgetful, and those in whom it is hard are the reverse.
But those in whom it is shaggy and rough and stony, infected with earth or dung which is mixed in it, receive indistinct imprints from the moulds.
So also do those whose wax is hard; for the imprints lack depth.
And imprints in soft wax are also indistinct, because they melt together and quickly become blurred;
but if besides all this they are crowded upon one another through lack of room, in some mean little soul, they are still more indistinct.
So all these men are likely to have false opinions.
For when they see or hear or think of anything, they cannot quickly assign things to the right imprints, but are slow about it, and because they assign them wrongly they usually see and hear and think amiss.
These men, in turn, are accordingly said to be deceived about realities and ignorant.
Theaetetus
You are right as right could be, Socrates.
Socrates
Shall we, then, say that false opinions exist in us?
Theaetetus
Assuredly.
Socrates
And true opinions, no doubt?
Theaetetus
And true ones also.
Socrates
Then now at last we think we have reached a valid agreement, that these two kinds of opinion incontestably exist?
Theaetetus
Most emphatically.
Socrates
Truly, Theaetetus, a garrulous man is a strange and unpleasant creature!
Theaetetus
Eh?
What makes you say that?
Socrates
Vexation at my own stupidity and genuine garrulity.
For what else could you call it when a man drags his arguments up and down because he is so stupid that he cannot be convinced, and is hardly to be induced to give up any one of them?
Theaetetus
But you, why are you vexed?
Socrates
I am not merely vexed, I am actually afraid; for I do not know what answer to make if anyone asks me: "Socrates, have you found out, I wonder, that false opinion exists neither in the relations of the perceptions to one another nor in the thoughts, but in the combination of perception with thought?"
I shall say "yes," I suppose, and put on airs, as if we had made a fine discovery.
Theaetetus
It seems to me, Socrates, that the result we have now brought out is not half bad.
Socrates
"Do you go on and assert, then," he will say, "that we never could imagine that the man whom we merely think of, but do not see, is a horse which also we do not see or touch or perceive by any other sense, but merely think of?"
I suppose I shall say that I do make that assertion.
Theaetetus
Yes, and you will be right.
Socrates
"Then," he will say, "according to that, could we ever imagine that the number eleven which is merely thought of, is the number twelve which also is merely thought of?"
Come now, it is for you to answer.
Theaetetus
Well, my answer will be that a man might imagine the eleven that he sees or touches to be twelve, but that he could never have that opinion concerning the eleven that he has in his mind.
Socrates
Well, then, do you think that anyone ever considered in his own mind five and seven, I do not mean by setting before his eyes seven men and five men and considering them, or anything of that sort, but seven and five in the abstract, which we say are imprints in the block of wax, and in regard to which we deny the possibility of forming false opinions taking these by themselves, do you imagine that anybody in the world has ever considered them,
talking to himself and asking himself what their sum is, and that one person has said and thought eleven, and another twelve, or do all say and think that it is twelve?
Theaetetus
No, by Zeus; many say eleven, and if you take a larger number for consideration, there is greater likelihood of error.
For I suppose you are speaking of any number rather than of these only.
Socrates
You are right in supposing so; and consider whether in that instance the abstract twelve in the block of wax is not itself imagined to be eleven.
Theaetetus
It seems so.
Socrates
Have we not, then, come back again to the beginning of our talk?
For the man who is affected in this way imagines that one thing which he knows is another thing which be knows.
This we said was impossible, and by this very argument we were forcing false opinion out of existence, that the same man might not be forced to know and not know the same things at the same time.
Theaetetus
Very true.
Socrates
Then we must show that forming false opinion is something or other different from the interchange of thought and perception.
For if it were that, we should never be deceived in abstract thoughts.
But as the case now stands, either there is no false opinion or it is possible for a man not to know that which he knows.
Which alternative will you choose?
Theaetetus
There is no possible choice, Socrates.
Socrates
And yet the argument is not likely to admit both.
But still, since we must not shrink from any risk, what if we should try to do a shameless deed?
Theaetetus
What is it?
Socrates
To undertake to tell what it really is to know.
Theaetetus
And why is that shameless?
Socrates
You seem not to remember that our whole talk from the beginning has been a search for knowledge, because we did not know what it is.
Theaetetus
Oh yes, I remember.
Socrates
Then is it not shameless to proclaim what it is to know, when we are ignorant of knowledge?
But really, Theaetetus, our talk has been badly tainted with unclearness all along;
for we have said over and over again "we know" and "we do not know" and "we have knowledge" and "we have no knowledge," as if we could understand each other, while we were still ignorant of knowledge; and at this very moment, if you please, we have again used the terms "be ignorant" and "understand," as though we had any right to use them if we are deprived of knowledge.
Theaetetus
But how will you converse, Socrates, if you refrain from these words?
Socrates
Not at all, being the man I am; but I might if I were a real reasoner; if such a man were present at this moment he would tell us to refrain from these terms, and would criticize my talk scathingly.
But since we are poor creatures, shall I venture to say what the nature of knowing is?
For it seems to me that would be of some advantage.
Theaetetus
Venture it then, by Zeus.
You shall have full pardon for not refraining from those terms.
Socrates
Have you heard what they say nowadays that knowing is?
Theaetetus
Perhaps; however, I don't remember just at this moment.
Socrates
They say it is having knowledge.
Theaetetus
True.
Socrates
Let us make a slight change and say possessing knowledge.
Theaetetus
Why, how will you claim that the one differs from the other?
Socrates
Perhaps it doesn't; but first hear how it seems to me to differ, and then help me to test my view.
Theaetetus
I will if I can.
Socrates
Well, then, having does not seem to me the same as possessing.
For instance, if a man bought a cloak and had it under his control, but did not wear it, we should certainly say, not that he had it, but that he possessed it.
Theaetetus
And rightly.
Socrates
Now see whether it is possible in the same way for one who possesses knowledge not to have it, as, for instance, if a man should catch wild birds pigeons or the like and should arrange an aviary at home and keep them in it, we might in a way assert that he always has them because he possesses them,
might we not?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
And yet in another way that he has none of them, but that he has acquired power over them, since he has brought them under his control in his own enclosure, to take them and hold them whenever he likes, by catching whichever bird he pleases, and to let them go again; and he can do this as often as be sees fit.
Theaetetus
That is true.
Socrates
Once more, then, just as a while ago we contrived some sort of a waxen figment in the soul, so now let us make in each soul an aviary stocked with all sorts of birds, some in flocks apart from the rest, others in small groups, and some solitary, flying hither and thither among them all.
Theaetetus
Consider it done.
What next?
Socrates
We must assume that while we are children this receptacle is empty, and we must understand that the birds represent the varieties of knowledge.
And whatsoever kind of knowledge a person acquires and shuts up in the enclosure, we must say that he has learned or discovered the thing of which this is the knowledge, and that just this is knowing.
Theaetetus
So be it.
Socrates
Consider then what expressions are needed for the process of recapturing and taking and holding and letting go again whichever he please of the kinds of knowledge, whether they are the same expressions as those needed for the original acquisition, or others.
But you will understand better by an illustration.
You admit that there is an art of arithmetic?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
Now suppose this to be a hunt after the kinds of knowledge, or sciences, of all odd and even numbers.
Theaetetus
I do so.
Socrates
Now it is by this art, I imagine, that a man has the sciences of numbers under his own control and also that any man who transmits them to another does this.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
And we say that when anyone transmits them he teaches, and when anyone receives them he learns, and when anyone, by having acquired them, has them in that aviary of ours, he knows them.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Socrates
Now pay attention to what follows from this.
Does not the perfect arithmetician understand all numbers;
for he has the sciences of all numbers in his mind?
Theaetetus
To be sure.
Socrates
Then would such a man ever count anything either any abstract numbers in his head, or any such external objects as possess number?
Theaetetus
Of course,
Socrates
But we shall affirm that counting is the same thing as considering how great any number in question is.
Theaetetus
We shall.
Socrates
Then he who by our previous admission knows all number is found to be considering that which he knows as if he did not know it.
You have doubtless heard of such ambiguities.
Theaetetus
Yes, I have.
Socrates
Continuing, then, our comparison with the acquisition and hunting of the pigeons, we shall say that the hunting is of two kinds, one before the acquisition for the sake of possessing, the other carried on by the possessor for the sake of taking and holding in his hands what he had acquired long before.
And just so when a man long since by learning came to possess knowledge of certain things, and knew them, he may have these very things afresh by taking up again the knowledge of each of them separately and holding it the knowledge which he had acquired long before, but had not at hand in his mind?
Theaetetus
That is true.
Socrates
This, then, was my question just now: How should we express ourselves in speaking about them when an arithmetician undertakes to count or a man of letters to read something?
In such a case shall we say that although he knows he sets himself to learn again from himself that which he knows?
Theaetetus
But that is extraordinary, Socrates.
Socrates
But shall we say that he is going to read or count that which he does not know, when we have granted that he knows all letters and all numbers?
Theaetetus
But that too is absurd.
Socrates
Shall we then say that words are nothing to us, if it amuses anyone to drag the expressions "know" and "learn" one way and another, but since we set up the distinction that it is one thing to possess knowledge and another thing to have it, we affirm that it is impossible not to possess what one possesses, so that it never happens that a man does not know that which he knows, but that it is possible to conceive a false opinion about it?
For it is possible to have not the knowledge of this thing, but some other knowledge instead, when in hunting for some one kind of knowledge, as the various kinds fly about, he makes a mistake and catches one instead of another; so in one example he thought eleven was twelve, because he caught the knowledge of twelve, which was within him, instead of that of eleven, caught a ringdove, as it were, instead of a pigeon.
Theaetetus
Yes, that is reasonable.
Socrates
But when he catches the knowledge he intends to catch, he is not deceived and has true opinion, and so true and false opinion exist and none of the things which formerly annoyed us interferes?
Perhaps you will agree to this; or what will you do?
Theaetetus
I will agree.
Socrates
Yes, for we have got rid of our difficulty about men not knowing that which they know; for we no longer find ourselves not possessing that which we possess, whether we are deceived about anything or not.
However, another more dreadful disaster seems to be coming in sight.
Theaetetus
What disaster?
Socrates
If the interchange of kinds of knowledge should ever turn out to be false opinion.
Theaetetus
How so?
Socrates
Is it not the height of absurdity, in the first place for one who has knowledge of something to be ignorant of this very thing, not through ignorance but through his knowledge; secondly, for him to be of opinion that this thing is something else and something else is this thing for the soul, when knowledge has come to it, to know nothing and be ignorant of all things?
For by this argument there is nothing to prevent ignorance from coming to us and making us know something and blindness from making us see, if knowledge is ever to make us ignorant.
Theaetetus
Perhaps, Socrates, we were not right in making the birds represent kinds of knowledge only, but we ought to have imagined kinds of ignorance also flying about in the soul with the others; then the hunter would catch sometimes knowledge and sometimes ignorance of the same thing, and through the ignorance he would have false, but through the knowledge true opinion.
Socrates
It is not easy, Theaetetus, to refrain from praising you.
However, examine your suggestion once more.
Let it be as you say: the man who catches the ignorance will, you say, have false opinion.
Is that it?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
But surely he will not also think that he has false opinion.
Theaetetus
Certainly not.
Socrates
No, but true opinion, and will have the attitude of knowing that about which he is deceived.
Theaetetus
Of course.
Socrates
Hence he will fancy that he has caught, and has, knowledge, not ignorance.
Theaetetus
Evidently.
Socrates
Then, after our long wanderings, we have come round again to our first difficulty.
For the real reasoner will laugh and say, "Most excellent Sirs, does a man who knows both knowledge and ignorance think that one of them, which he knows, is another thing which he knows;
or, knowing neither of them, is he of opinion that one, which he does not know, is another thing which he does not know;
or, knowing one and not the other, does he think that the one he does not know is the one he knows;
or that the one he knows is the one he does not know?
Or will you go on and tell me that there are kinds of knowledge of the kinds of knowledge and of ignorance, and that he who possesses these kinds of knowledge and has enclosed them in some sort of other ridiculous aviaries or waxen figments, knows them, so long as he possesses them, even if he has them not at hand in his soul?
And in this fashion are you going to be compelled to trot about endlessly in the same circle without making any progress?"
What shall we reply to this, Theaetetus?
Theaetetus
By Zeus, Socrates, I don't know what to say.
Socrates
Then, my boy, is the argument right in rebuking us and in pointing out that we were wrong to abandon knowledge and seek first for false opinion?
It is impossible to know the latter until we have adequately comprehended the nature of knowledge.
Theaetetus
As the case now stands, Socrates, we cannot help thinking as you say.
Socrates
To begin, then, at the beginning once more, what shall we say knowledge is?
For surely we are not going to give it up yet, are we?
Theaetetus
Not by any means, unless, that is, you give it up.
Socrates
Tell us, then, what definition will make us contradict ourselves least.
Theaetetus
The one we tried before, Socrates; at any rate, I have nothing else to offer.
Socrates
What one?
Theaetetus
That knowledge is true opinion;
for true opinion is surely free from error and all its results are fine and good.
Socrates
The man who was leading the way through the river, Theaetetus, said: "The result itself will show;" and so in this matter, if we go on with our search, perhaps the thing will turn up in our path and of itself reveal the object of our search; but if we stay still, we shall discover nothing.
Theaetetus
You are right; let us go on with our investigation.
Socrates
Well, then, this at least calls for slight investigation; for you have a whole profession which declares that true opinion is not knowledge.
Theaetetus
How so?
What profession is it?
Socrates
The profession of those who are greatest in wisdom, who are called orators and lawyers;
for they persuade men by the art which they possess, not teaching them, but making them have whatever opinion they like.
Or do you think there are any teachers so clever as to be able, in the short time allowed by the water-clock, satisfactorily to teach the judges the truth about what happened to people who have been robbed of their money or have suffered other acts of violence, when there were no eyewitnesses?
Theaetetus
I certainly do not think so; but I think they can persuade them.
Socrates
And persuading them is making them have an opinion, is it not?
Theaetetus
Of course.
Socrates
Then when judges are justly persuaded about matters which one can know only by having seen them and in no other way, in such a case, judging of them from hearsay, having acquired a true opinion of them, they have judged without knowledge, though they are rightly persuaded, if the judgement they have passed is correct, have they not?
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Socrates
But, my friend, if true opinion and knowledge were the same thing in law courts, the best of judges could never have true opinion without knowledge; in fact, however, it appears that the two are different.
Theaetetus
Oh yes, I remember now, Socrates, having heard someone make the distinction, but I had forgotten it.
He said that knowledge was true opinion accompanied by reason, but that unreasoning true opinion was outside of the sphere of knowledge; and matters of which there is not a rational explanation are unknowable yes, that is what he called them and those of which there is are knowable.
Socrates
I am glad you mentioned that.
But tell us how he distinguished between the knowable and the unknowable, that we may see whether the accounts that you and I have heard agree.
Theaetetus
But I do not know whether I can think it out; but if someone else were to make the statement of it, I think I could follow.
Socrates
Listen then, while I relate it to you "a dream for a dream."
I in turn used to imagine that I heard certain persons say that the primary elements of which we and all else are composed admit of no rational explanation;
for each alone by itself can only be named, and no qualification can be added, neither that it is nor that it is not, for that would at once be adding to it existence or non-existence, whereas we must add nothing to it, if we are to speak of that itself alone.
Indeed, not even "itself" or "that" or "each" or "alone" or "this" or anything else of the sort, of which there are many, must be added; for these are prevalent terms which are added to all things indiscriminately and are different from the things to which they are added; but if it were possible to explain an element, and it admitted of a rational explanation of its own, it would have to be explained apart from everything else.
But in fact none of the primal elements can be expressed by reason; they can only be named, for they have only a name; but the things composed of these are themselves complex, and so their names are complex and form a rational explanation; for the combination of names is the essence of reasoning.
Thus the elements are not objects of reason or of knowledge, but only of perception, whereas the combinations of them are objects of knowledge and expression and true opinion.
When therefore a man acquires without reasoning the true opinion about anything, his mind has the truth about it, but has no knowledge; for he who cannot give and receive a rational explanation of a thing is without knowledge of it; but when he has acquired also a rational explanation he may possibly have become all that I have said and may now be perfect in knowledge.
Is that the version of the dream you have heard, or is it different?
Theaetetus
That was it exactly.
Socrates
Are you satisfied, then, and do you state it in this way, that true opinion accompanied by reason is knowledge?
Theaetetus
Precisely.
Socrates
Can it be, Theaetetus, that we now, in this casual manner, have found out on this day what many wise men have long been seeking and have grown grey in the search?
Theaetetus
I, at any rate, Socrates, think our present statement is good.
Socrates
Probably this particular statement is so; for what knowledge could there still be apart from reason and right opinion?
One point, however, in what has been said is unsatisfactory to me.
Theaetetus
What point?
Socrates
Just that which seems to be the cleverest; the assertion that the elements are unknowable and the class of combinations is knowable.
Theaetetus
Is that not right?
Socrates
We are sure to find out, for we have as hostages the examples which he who said all this used in his argument.
Theaetetus
What examples?
Socrates
The elements in writing, the letters of the alphabet, and their combinations, the syllables;
or do you think the author of the statements we are discussing had something else in view?
Theaetetus
No; those are what he had in view.
Socrates
Let us, then, take them up and examine them, or rather, let us examine ourselves and see whether it was in accordance with this theory, or not, that we learned letters.
First then, the syllables have a rational explanation, but the letters have not?
Theaetetus
I suppose so.
Socrates
I think so, too, decidedly.
Now if anyone should ask about the first syllable of Socrates; "Theaetetus, tell me, what is SO?"
What would you reply?
Theaetetus
I should say "S and O."
Socrates
This, then, is your explanation of the syllable?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
Come now, in the same manner give me the explanation of the S.
Theaetetus
How can one give any elements of an element?
For really, Socrates, the S is a voiceless letter, a mere noise, as of the tongue hissing; B again has neither voice nor noise, nor have most of the other letters;
and so it is quite right to say that they have no explanation, seeing that the most distinct of them, the seven vowels, have only voice, but no explanation whatsoever.
Socrates
In this point, then, my friend, it would seem that we have reached a right conclusion about knowledge.
Theaetetus
I think we have.
Socrates
But have we been right in laying down the principle that whereas the letter is unknowable, yet the syllable is knowable?
Theaetetus
Probably.
Socrates
Well then, shall we say that the syllable is the two letters, or, if there be more than two, all of them, or is it a single concept that has arisen from their combination?
Theaetetus
I think we mean all the letters it contains.
Socrates
Now take the case of two, S and O.
The two together are the first syllable of my name.
He who knows it knows the two letters, does he not?
Theaetetus
Of course.
Socrates
He knows, that is, the S and the O.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
How is that?
He is ignorant of each, and knowing neither of them he knows them both?
Theaetetus
That is monstrous and absurd, Socrates.
Socrates
And yet if a knowledge of each letter is necessary before one can know both, he who is ever to know a syllable must certainly know the letters first, and so our fine theory will have run away and vanished!
Theaetetus
And very suddenly, too.
Socrates
Yes, for we are not watching it carefully.
Perhaps we ought to have said that the syllable is not the letters, but a single concept that has arisen from them, having a single form of its own, different from the letters.
Theaetetus
Certainly; and perhaps that will be better than the other way.
Socrates
Let us look into that; we must not give up in such unmanly fashion a great and impressive theory.
Theaetetus
No, we must not.
Socrates
Let it be, then, as we say now, that the syllable or combination is a single form arising out of the several conjoined elements, and that it is the same in words and in all other things.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Socrates
Therefore there must be no parts of it.
Theaetetus
How so?
Socrates
Because if there are parts of anything, the whole must inevitably be all the parts;
or do you assert also that the whole that has arisen out of the parts is a single concept different from all the parts?
Theaetetus
Yes, I do.
Socrates
Do you then say that all and the whole are the same, or that each of the two is different from the other?
Theaetetus
I am not sure; but you tell me to answer boldly, so I take the risk and say that they are different.
Socrates
Your boldness, Theaetetus, is right; but whether your answer is so remains to be seen.
Theaetetus
Yes, certainly, we must see about that.
Socrates
The whole, then, according to our present view, would differ from all?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
How about this?
Is there any difference between all in the plural and all in the singular?
For instance, if we say one, two, three, four, five, six, or twice three, or three times two, or four and two, or three and two and one, are we in all these forms speaking of the same or of different numbers?
Theaetetus
Of the same.
Socrates
That is, of six?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
Then in each form of speech we have spoken of all the six?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
And again do we not speak of one thing when we speak of them all?
Theaetetus
Assuredly.
Socrates
That is, of six?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
Then in all things that are made up of number, we apply the same term to all in the plural and all in the singular?
Theaetetus
Apparently.
Socrates
Here is another way of approaching the matter.
The number of the fathom and the fathom are the same, are they not?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
And of the furlong likewise.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
And the number of the army is the same as the army, and all such cases are alike?
In each of them all the number is all the thing.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
And is the number of each anything but the parts of each?
Theaetetus
No.
Socrates
Everything that has parts, accordingly, consists of parts, does it not?
Theaetetus
Evidently.
Socrates
But we are agreed that the all must be all the parts if all the number is to be the all.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
Then the whole does not consist of parts,
for if it consisted of all the parts it would be the all.
Theaetetus
That seems to be true.
Socrates
But is a part a part of anything in the world but the whole?
Theaetetus
Yes, of the all.
Socrates
You are putting up a brave fight, Theaetetus.
But is not the all precisely that of which nothing is wanting?
Theaetetus
Necessarily.
Socrates
And is not just this same thing, from which nothing whatsoever is lacking, a whole?
For that from which anything is lacking is neither a whole nor all, which have become identical simultaneously and for the same reason.
Theaetetus
I think now that there is no difference between all and whole.
Socrates
We were saying, were we not, that if there are parts of anything, the whole and all of it will be all the parts?
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Socrates
Once more, then, as I was trying to say just now, if the syllable is not the letters, does it not follow necessarily that it contains the letters, not as parts of it, or else that being the same as the letters, it is equally knowable with them?
Theaetetus
It does.
Socrates
And it was in order to avoid this that we assumed that it was different from them?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
Well then, if the letters are not parts of the syllable, can you mention any other things which are parts of it, but are not the letters of it?
Theaetetus
Certainly not.
For if I grant that there are parts of the syllable, it would be ridiculous to give up the letters and look for other things as parts.
Socrates
Without question, then, Theaetetus, the syllable would be, according to our present view, some indivisible concept.
Theaetetus
I agree.
Socrates
Do you remember, then, my friend, that we admitted a little while ago, on what we considered good grounds, that there can be no rational explanation of the primary elements of which other things are composed, because each of them, when taken by itself, is not composite, and we could not properly apply to such an element even the expression "be" or "this," because these terms are different and alien, and for this reason it is irrational and unknowable?
Theaetetus
I remember.
Socrates
And is not this the sole reason why it is single in form and indivisible?
I can see no other.
Theaetetus
There is no other to be seen.
Socrates
Then the syllable falls into the same class with the letter, if it has no parts and is a single form?
Theaetetus
Yes, unquestionably.
Socrates
If, then, the syllable is a plurality of letters and is a whole of which the letters are parts, the syllables and the letters are equally knowable and expressible, if all the parts were found to be the same as the whole.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Socrates
But if one and indivisible, then syllable and likewise letter are equally irrational and unknowable; for the same cause will make them so.
Theaetetus
I cannot dispute it.
Socrates
Then we must not accept the statement of any one who says that the syllable is knowable and expressible, but the letter is not.
Theaetetus
No, not if we are convinced by our argument.
Socrates
But would you not rather accept the opposite belief, judging by your own experience when you were learning to read?
Theaetetus
What experience?
Socrates
In learning, you were merely constantly trying to distinguish between the letters both by sight and by hearing, keeping each of them distinct from the rest, that you might not be disturbed by their sequence when they were spoken or written.
Theaetetus
That is very true.
Socrates
And in the music school was not perfect attainment the ability to follow each note and tell which string produced it; and everyone would agree that the notes are the elements of music?
Theaetetus
Yes, that is all true.
Socrates
Then if we are to argue from the elements and combinations in which we ourselves have experience to other things in general, we shall say that the elements as a class admit of a much clearer knowledge than the compounds and of a knowledge that is much more important for the complete attainment of each branch of learning, and if anyone says that the compound is by its nature knowable and the element unknowable, we shall consider that he is, intentionally or unintentionally, joking.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Socrates
Still other proofs of this might be brought out, I think; but let us not on that account lose sight of the question before us, which is: What is meant by the doctrine that the most perfect knowledge arises from the addition of rational explanation to true opinion?
Theaetetus
No, we must not.
Socrates
Now what are we intended to understand by "rational explanation"?
I think it means one of three things.
Theaetetus
What are they?
Socrates
The first would be making one's own thought clear through speech by means of verbs and nouns, imaging the opinion in the stream that flows through the lips, as in a mirror or water.
Do you not think the rational explanation is something of that sort?
Theaetetus
Yes, I do.
At any rate, we say that he who does that speaks or explains.
Socrates
Well, that is a thing that anyone can do sooner or later; he can show what he thinks about anything, unless he is deaf or dumb from the first; and so all who have any right opinion will be found to have it with the addition of rational explanation, and there will henceforth be no possibility of right opinion apart from knowledge.
Theaetetus
True.
Socrates
Let us not, therefore, carelessly accuse him of talking nonsense who gave the definition of knowledge which we are now considering; for perhaps that is not what he meant.
He may have meant that each person if asked about anything must be able in reply to give his questioner an account of it in terms of its elements.
Theaetetus
As for example, Socrates?
Socrates
As, for example, Hesiod, speaking of a wagon, says, "a hundred pieces of wood in a wagon."
Now I could not name the pieces, nor, I fancy, could you; but if we were asked what a wagon is, we should be satisfied if we could say "wheels, axle, body, rims, yoke."
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Socrates
But he, perhaps, would think we were ridiculous, just as he would if, on being asked about your name, we should reply by telling the syllables, holding a right opinion and expressing correctly what we have to say, but should think we were grammarians and as such both possessed and were expressing as grammarians would the rational explanation of the name Theaetetus.
He would say that it is impossible for anyone to give a rational explanation of anything with knowledge, until he gives a complete enumeration of the elements, combined with true opinion.
That, I believe, is what was said before.
Theaetetus
Yes, it was.
Socrates
So, too, he would say that we have right opinion about a wagon, but that he who can give an account of its essential nature in terms of those one hundred parts has by this addition added rational explanation to true opinion and has acquired technical knowledge of the essential nature of a wagon, in place of mere opinion, by describing the whole in terms of its elements.
Theaetetus
Do you agree to that, Socrates?
Socrates
If you, my friend, agree to it and accept the view that orderly description in terms of its elements is a rational account of anything, but that description in terms of syllables or still larger units is irrational, tell me so, that we may examine the question.
Theaetetus
Certainly I accept it.
Socrates
Do you accept it in the belief that anyone has knowledge of anything when he thinks that the same element is a part sometimes of one thing and sometimes of another or when he is of opinion that the same thing has as a part of it sometimes one thing and sometimes another?
Theaetetus
Not at all, by Zeus.
Socrates
Then do you forget that when you began to learn to read you and the others did just that?
Theaetetus
Do you mean when we thought that sometimes one letter and sometimes another belonged to the same syllable, and when we put the same letter sometimes into the proper syllable and sometimes into another?
Socrates
That is what I mean.
Theaetetus
By Zeus, I do not forget, nor do I think that those have knowledge who are in that condition.
Socrates
Take an example: When at such a stage in his progress a person in writing "Theaetetus" thinks he ought to write, and actually does write, TH and E, and again in trying to write "Theodorus" thinks he ought to write, and does write, T and E, shall we say that he knows the first syllable of your names?
Theaetetus
No, we just now agreed that a person in such a condition has not yet gained knowledge.
Socrates
Then there is nothing to prevent the same person from being in that condition with respect to the second and third and fourth syllables?
Theaetetus
No, nothing.
Socrates
Then, in that case, he has in mind the orderly description in terms of letters, and will write "Theaetetus" with right opinion, when he writes the letters in order?
Theaetetus
Evidently.
Socrates
But he is still, as we say, without knowledge, though he has right opinion?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
Yes, but with his opinion he has rational explanation;
for he wrote with the method in terms of letters in his mind, and we agreed that that was rational explanation.
Theaetetus
True.
Socrates
There is, then, my friend, a combination of right opinion with rational explanation, which cannot as yet properly be called knowledge?
Theaetetus
There is not much doubt about it.
Socrates
So it seems that the perfectly true definition of knowledge, which we thought we had, was but a golden dream.
Or shall we wait a bit before we condemn it?
Perhaps the definition to be adopted is not this, but the remaining one of the three possibilities one of which we said must be affirmed by anyone who asserts that knowledge is right opinion combined with rational explanation.
Theaetetus
I am glad you called that to mind.
For there is still one left.
The first was a kind of vocal image of the thought, the second the orderly approach to the whole through the elements, which we have just been discussing, and what is the third?
Socrates
It is just the definition which most people would give, that knowledge is the ability to tell some characteristic by which the object in question differs from all others.
Theaetetus
As an example of the method, what explanation can you give me, and of what thing?
Socrates
As an example, if you like, take the sun: I think it is enough for you to be told that it is the brightest of the heavenly bodies that revolve about the earth.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Socrates
Understand why I say this.
It is because, as we were just saying, if you get hold of the distinguishing characteristic by which a given thing differs from the rest, you will, as some say, get hold of the definition or explanation of it; but so long as you cling to some common quality, your explanation will pertain to all those objects to which the common quality belongs.
Theaetetus
I understand; and it seems to me that it is quite right to call that kind a rational explanation or definition.
Socrates
Then he who possesses right opinion about anything and adds thereto a comprehension of the difference which distinguishes it from other things will have acquired knowledge of that thing of which he previously had only opinion.
Theaetetus
That is what we affirm.
Socrates
Theaetetus, now that I have come closer to our statement, I do not understand it at all.
It is like coming close to a scene-painting.
While I stood off at a distance, I thought there was something in it.
Theaetetus
What do you mean?
Socrates
I will tell you if I can.
Assume that I have right opinion about you; if I add the explanation or definition of you, then I have knowledge of you, otherwise I have merely opinion.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
But explanation was, we agreed, the interpretation of your difference.
Theaetetus
It was.
Socrates
Then so long as I had merely opinion, I did not grasp in my thought any of the points in which you differ from others?
Theaetetus
Apparently not.
Socrates
Therefore I was thinking of some one of the common traits which you possess no more than other men.
Theaetetus
You must have been.
Socrates
For heaven's sake!
How in the world could I in that case have any opinion about you more than about anyone else?
Suppose that I thought "That is Theaetetus which is a man and has nose and eyes and mouth" and so forth, mentioning all the parts.
Can this thought make me think of Theaetetus any more than of Theodorus or of the meanest of the Mysians, as the saying is?
Theaetetus
Of course not.
Socrates
But if I think not only of a man with nose and eyes, but of one with snub nose and protruding eyes, shall I then have an opinion of you any more than of myself and all others like me?
Theaetetus
Not at all.
Socrates
No; I fancy Theaetetus will not be the object of opinion in me until this snubnosedness of yours has stamped and deposited in my mind a memorial different from those of the other examples of snubnosedness that I have seen, and the other traits that make up your personality have done the like.
Then that memorial, if I meet you again tomorrow, will awaken my memory and make me have right opinion about you.
Theaetetus
Very true.
Socrates
Then right opinion also would have to do with differences in any given instance?
Theaetetus
At any rate, it seems so.
Socrates
Then what becomes of the addition of reason or explanation to right opinion?
For if it is defined as the addition of an opinion of the way in which a given thing differs from the rest, it is an utterly absurd injunction.
Theaetetus
How so?
Socrates
When we have a right opinion of the way in which certain things differ from other things, we are told to acquire a right opinion of the way in which those same things differ from other things!
On this plan the twirling of a scytale or a pestle or anything of the sort would be as nothing compared with this injunction.
It might more justly be called a blind man's giving directions; for to command us to acquire that which we already have, in order to learn that of which we already have opinion, is very like a man whose sight is mightily darkened.
Theaetetus
Tell me now, what did you intend to say when you asked the question a while ago?
Socrates
If, my boy, the command to add reason or explanation means learning to know and not merely getting an opinion about the difference, our splendid definition of knowledge would be a fine affair!
For learning to know is acquiring knowledge, is it not?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Socrates
Then, it seems, if asked, "What is knowledge?"
our leader will reply that it is right opinion with the addition of a knowledge of difference; for that would, according to him, be the addition of reason or explanation.
Theaetetus
So it seems.
Socrates
And it is utterly silly, when we are looking for a definition of knowledge, to say that it is right opinion with knowledge, whether of difference or of anything else whatsoever.
So neither perception, Theaetetus, nor true opinion, nor reason or explanation combined with true opinion could be knowledge.
Theaetetus
Apparently not.
Socrates
Are we then, my friend, still pregnant and in travail with knowledge, or have we brought forth everything?
Theaetetus
Yes, we have, and, by Zeus, Socrates, with your help I have already said more than there was in me.
Socrates
Then does our art of midwifery declare to us that all the offspring that have been born are mere wind-eggs and not worth rearing?
Socrates
If after this you ever undertake to conceive other thoughts, Theaetetus, and do conceive, you will be pregnant with better thoughts than these by reason of the present search, and if you remain barren, you will be less harsh and gentler to your associates, for you will have the wisdom not to think you know that which you do not know.
So much and no more my art can accomplish;
nor do I know aught of the things that are known by others, the great and wonderful men who are today and have been in the past.
This art, however, both my mother and I received from God, she for women and I for young and noble men and for all who are fair.
And now I must go to the Porch of the King, to answer to the suit which Meletus has brought against me.
But in the morning, Theodorus, let us meet here again.
Sophist
Theodorus
Socrates
an Elean Stranger
Theaetetus
Theodorus
According to our yesterday's agreement, Socrates, we have come ourselves, as we were bound to do, and we bring also this man with us; he is a stranger from Elea, one of the followers of Parmenides and Zeno, and a real philosopher.
Socrates
Are you not unwittingly bringing, as Homer says, some god, and no mere stranger, Theodorus?
He says that the gods, and especially the god of strangers, enter into companionship with men who have a share of due reverence and that they behold the deeds, both violent and righteous, of mankind.
So perhaps this companion of yours may be one of the higher powers, who comes to watch over and refute us because we are worthless in argument a kind of god of refutation.
Theodorus
No, Socrates, that is not the stranger's character; he is more reasonable than those who devote themselves to disputation.
And though I do not think he is a god at all, I certainly do think he is divine, for I give that epithet to all philosophers.
Socrates
And rightly, my friend.
However, I fancy it is not much easier, if I may say so, to recognize this class, than that of the gods.
For these men I mean those who are not feignedly but really philosophers appear disguised in all sorts of shapes, thanks to the ignorance of the rest of mankind, and "visit the cities,"
beholding from above the life of those below, and they seem to some to be of no worth and to others to be worth everything.
And sometimes they appear disguised as statesmen and sometimes as sophists, and sometimes they may give some people the impression that they are altogether mad.
But I should like to ask our stranger here, if agreeable to him, what people in his country thought about these matters, and what names they used.
Theodorus
What matters do you mean?
Socrates
Sophist, statesman, philosopher.
Theodorus
What particular difficulty and what kind of difficulty in regard to them is it about which you had in mind to ask?
Socrates
It is this: Did they consider all these one, or two, or, as there are three names, did they divide them into three classes and ascribe to each a class, corresponding to a single name?
Theodorus
I think he has no objection to talking about them.
What do you say, stranger?
Stranger
Just what you did, Theodorus; for I have no objection, and it is not difficult to say that they considered them three.
But it is no small or easy task to define clearly the nature of each.
Theodorus
The fact is, Socrates, that by chance you have hit upon a question very like what we happened to be asking him before we came here; and he made excuses to us then, as he does now to you; though he admits that he has heard it thoroughly discussed and remembers what he heard.
Socrates
In that case, stranger, do not refuse us the first favor we have asked; but just tell us this: Do you generally prefer to expound in a long uninterrupted speech of your own whatever you wish to explain to anyone, or do you prefer the method of questions?
I was present once when Parmenides employed the latter method and carried on a splendid discussion.
I was a young man then, and he was very old.
Stranger
The method of dialogue, Socrates, is easier with an interlocutor who is tractable and gives no trouble; but otherwise I prefer the continuous speech by one person.
Socrates
Well, you may choose whomever you please of those present; they will all respond pleasantly to you; but if you take my advice you will choose one of the young fellows, Theaetetus here, or any of the others who suits you.
Stranger
Socrates, this is the first time I have come among you, and I am somewhat ashamed, instead of carrying on the discussion by merely giving brief replies to your questions, to deliver an extended, long drawn out speech, either as an address of my own or in reply to another, as if I were giving an exhibition; but I must, for really the present subject is not what one might expect from the form of the question, but is a matter for very long speech.
On the other hand it seems unfriendly and discourteous to refuse a favor to you and these gentlemen, especially when you have spoken as you did.
As for Theaetetus I accept him most willingly as interlocutor in view of my previous conversation with him and of your present recommendation.
Theaetetus
But, stranger, by taking this course and following Socrates's suggestion will you please the others too?
Stranger
I am afraid there is nothing more to be said about that, Theaetetus; but from now on, my talk will, I fancy, be addressed to you.
And if you get tired and are bored by the length of the talk, do not blame me, but these friends of yours.
Theaetetus
Oh, no, I do not think I shall get tired of it so easily, but if such a thing does happen, we will call in this Socrates, the namesake of the other Socrates; he is of my own age and my companion in the gymnasium, and is in the habit of working with me in almost everything.
Stranger
Very well; you will follow your own devices about that as the discussion proceeds; but now you and I must investigate in common, beginning first, as it seems to me, with the sophist, and must search out and make plain by argument what he is.
For as yet you and I have nothing in common about him but the name; but as to the thing to which we give the name, we may perhaps each have a conception of it in our own minds; however, we ought always in every instance to come to agreement about the thing itself by argument rather than about the mere name without argument.
But the tribe which we now intend to search for, the sophist, is not the easiest thing in the world to catch and define, and everyone has agreed long ago that if investigations of great matters are to be properly worked out we ought to practice them on small and easier matters before attacking the very greatest.
So now, Theaetetus, this is my advice to ourselves, since we think the family of sophists is troublesome and hard to catch, that we first practise the method of hunting in something easier, unless you perhaps have some simpler way to suggest.
Theaetetus
I have not.
Stranger
Then shall we take some lesser thing and try to use it as a pattern for the greater?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
Well, then, what example can we set before us which is well known and small, but no less capable of definition than any of the greater things?
Say an angler; is he not known to all and unworthy of any great interest?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
But I hope he offers us a method and is capable of a definition not unsuitable to our purpose.
Theaetetus
That would be good.
Stranger
Come now; let us begin with him in this way:
Tell me, shall we say that he is a man with an art, or one without an art, but having some other power?
Theaetetus
Certainly not one without an art.
Stranger
But of all arts there are, speaking generally, two kinds?
Theaetetus
How so?
Stranger
Agriculture and all kinds of care of any living beings, and that which has to do with things which are put together or molded (utensils we call them), and the art of imitation all these might properly be called by one name.
Theaetetus
How so, and what is the name?
Stranger
When anyone brings into being something which did not previously exist, we say that he who brings it into being produces it and that which is brought into being is produced.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
Now all the arts which we have just mentioned direct their energy to production.
Theaetetus
Yes, they do.
Stranger
Let us, then, call these collectively the productive art.
Theaetetus
Agreed.
Stranger
And after this comes the whole class of learning and that of acquiring knowledge, and money making, and fighting, and hunting.
None of these is creative, but they are all engaged in coercing, by deeds or words, things which already exist and have been produced, or in preventing others from coercing them; therefore all these divisions together might very properly be called acquisitive art.
Theaetetus
Yes, that would be proper.
Stranger
Then since acquisitive and productive art comprise all the arts, in which, Theaetetus, shall we place the art of angling?
Theaetetus
In acquisitive art, clearly.
Stranger
And are there not two classes of acquisitive art
one the class of exchange between voluntary agents by means of gifts and wages and purchases, and the other, which comprises all the rest of acquisitive art, and, since it coerces either by word or deed, might be called coercive?
Theaetetus
It appears so, at any rate, from what you have said.
Stranger
Well then, shall we not divide coercive art into two parts?
Theaetetus
In what way?
Stranger
By calling all the open part of it fighting and all the secret part hunting.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
But it would be unreasonable not to divide hunting into two parts.
Theaetetus
Say how it can be done.
Stranger
By dividing it into the hunting of the lifeless and of the living.
Theaetetus
Certainly, if both exist.
Stranger
Of course they exist.
And we must pass over the hunting of lifeless things, which has no name, with the exception of some kinds of diving and the like, which are of little importance; but the hunting of living things we will call animal-hunting.
Theaetetus
Very well.
Stranger
And two classes of animal-hunting might properly be made, one (and this is divided under many classes and names) the hunting of creatures that go on their feet, land-animal hunting, and the other that of swimming creatures, to be called, as a whole, water-animal hunting?
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
And of swimming creatures we see that one tribe is winged and the other is in the water?
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
And the hunting of winged creatures is called, as a whole, fowling.
Theaetetus
It is.
Stranger
And the hunting of water creatures goes by the general name of fishing.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And might I not divide this kind of hunting into two principal divisions?
Theaetetus
What divisions?
Stranger
The one carries on the hunt by means of enclosures merely, the other by a blow.
Theaetetus
What do you mean, and how do you distinguish the two?
Stranger
As regards the first, because whatever surrounds anything and encloses it so as to constrain it is properly called an enclosure.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
May not, then, wicker baskets and seines and snares and nets and the like be called enclosures?
Theaetetus
Assuredly.
Stranger
Then we will call this division hunting by enclosures, or something of that sort.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And the other, which is done with a blow, by means of hooks and three pronged spears, we must now to name it with a single word call striking; or could a better name be found, Theaetetus?
Theaetetus
Never mind the name; that will do well enough.
Stranger
Then the kind of striking which takes place at night by the light of a fire is, I suppose, called by the hunters themselves fire-hunting.
Theaetetus
To be sure.
Stranger
And that which belongs to the daytime is, as a whole, barb-hunting, since the spears, as well as the hooks, are tipped with barbs.
Theaetetus
Yes, it is so called.
Stranger
Then of striking which belongs to barb-hunting, that part which proceeds downward from above, is called, because tridents are chiefly used in it, tridentry, I suppose.
Theaetetus
Yes, some people, at any rate, call it so.
Stranger
Then there still remains, I may say, only one further kind.
Theaetetus
What is that?
Stranger
The kind that is characterized by the opposite sort of blow, which is practised with a hook and strikes, not any chance part of the body of the fishes, as tridents do, but only the head and mouth of the fish caught, and proceeds from below upwards, being pulled up by twigs and rods.
By what name, Theaetetus, shall we say this ought to be called?
Theaetetus
I think our search is now ended and we have found the very thing we set before us a while ago as necessary to find.
Stranger
Now, then, you and I are not only agreed about the name of angling, but we have acquired also a satisfactory definition of the thing itself.
For of art as a whole, half was acquisitive, and of the acquisitive, half was coercive, and of the coercive, half was hunting, and of hunting, half was animal hunting, and of animal hunting, half was water hunting, and, taken as a whole, of water hunting the lower part was fishing, and of fishing, half was striking, and of striking, half was barb-hunting,
and of this the part in which the blow is pulled from below upwards at an angle has a name in the very likeness of the act and is called angling, which was the object of our present search.
Theaetetus
That at all events has been made perfectly clear.
Stranger
Come, then, let us use this as a pattern and try to find out what a sophist is.
Theaetetus
By all means.
Stranger
Well, then, the first question we asked was whether we must assume that the angler was just a man or was a man with an art.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
Now take this man of ours, Theaetetus.
Shall we assume that he is just a man, or by all means really a man of wisdom?
Theaetetus
Certainly not just a man; for I catch your meaning that he is very far from being wise, although his name implies wisdom.
Stranger
But we must, it seems, assume that he has an art of some kind.
Theaetetus
Well, then, what in the world is this art that he has?
Stranger
Good gracious, Have we failed to notice that the man is akin to the other man?
Theaetetus
Who is akin to whom?
Stranger
The angler to the sophist.
Theaetetus
How so?
Stranger
They both seem clearly to me to be a sort of hunters.
Theaetetus
What is the hunting of the second?
We have spoken about the first.
Stranger
We just now divided hunting as a whole into two classes, and made one division that of swimming creatures and the other that of land-hunting.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And the one we discussed, so far as the swimming creatures that live in the water are concerned; but we left the land-hunting undivided, merely remarking that it has many forms.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
Now up to that point the sophist and the angler proceed together from the starting-point of acquisitive art.
Theaetetus
I think they do.
Stranger
But they separate at the point of animal-hunting, where the one turns to the sea and rivers and lakes to hunt the animals in those.
Theaetetus
To be sure.
Stranger
But the other turns toward the land and to rivers of a different kind rivers of wealth and youth, bounteous meadows, as it were and he intends to coerce the creatures in them.
Theaetetus
What do you mean?
Stranger
Of land-hunting there are two chief divisions.
Theaetetus
What are they?
Stranger
One is the hunting of tame, the other of wild creatures.
Theaetetus
Is there, then, a hunting of tame creatures?
Stranger
Yes, If man is a tame animal; but make any assumption you like, that there is no tame animal, or that some other tame animal exists but man is a wild one or that man is tame but there is no hunting of man.
For the purpose of our definition choose whichever of these statements you think is satisfactory to you.
Theaetetus
Why, Stranger, I think we are a tame animal, and I agree that there is a hunting of man.
Stranger
Let us, then, say that the hunting of tame animals is also of two kinds.
Theaetetus
How do we justify that assertion?
Stranger
By defining piracy, man-stealing, tyranny, and the whole art of war all collectively as hunting by force.
Theaetetus
Excellent.
Stranger
And by giving the art of the law courts, of the public platform, and of conversation also a single name and calling them all collectively an art of persuasion.
Theaetetus
Correct.
Stranger
Now let us say that there are two kinds of persuasion.
Theaetetus
What kinds?
Stranger
The one has to do with private persons, the other with the community.
Theaetetus
Granted; each of them does form a class.
Stranger
Then again of the hunting of private persons one kind receives pay, and the other brings gifts, does it not?
Theaetetus
I do not understand.
Stranger
Apparently you have never yet paid attention to the lovers' method of hunting.
Theaetetus
In what respect?
Stranger
That in addition to their other efforts they give presents to those whom they hunt.
Theaetetus
You are quite right.
Stranger
Let us, then, call this the amatory art.
Theaetetus
Agreed.
Stranger
But that part of the paid kind which converses to furnish gratification and makes pleasure exclusively its bait and demands as its pay only maintenance, we might all agree, if I am not mistaken, to call the art of flattery or of making things pleasant.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
But the class which proposes to carry on its conversations for the sake of virtue and demands its pay in cash does not this deserve to be called by another name?
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
And what is that name?
Try to tell.
Theaetetus
It is obvious; for I think we have discovered the sophist.
And therefore by uttering that word I think I should give him the right name.
Stranger
Then, as it seems, according to our present reasoning, Theaetetus, the part of appropriative, coercive, hunting art which hunts animals, land animals, tame animals, man, privately, for pay, is paid in cash, claims to give education, and is a hunt after rich and promising youths, must so our present argument concludes be called sophistry.
Theaetetus
Most assuredly.
Stranger
But let us look at it in still another way; for the class we are now examining partakes of no mean art, but of a very many-sided one.
And we must indeed do so, for in our previous talk it presents an appearance of being, not what we now say it is, but another class.
Theaetetus
How so?
Stranger
The acquisitive art was of two sorts, the one the division of hunting, the other that of exchange.
Theaetetus
Yes, it was.
Stranger
Now shall we say that there are two sorts of exchange, the one by gift, the other by sale?
Theaetetus
So be it.
Stranger
And we shall say further that exchange by sale is divided into two parts.
Theaetetus
How so?
Stranger
We make this distinction calling the part which sells a man's own productions the selling of one's own, and the other, which exchanges the works of others, exchange.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
Well, then, that part of exchange which is carried on in the city, amounting to about half of it, is called retailing, is it not?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And that which exchanges goods from city to city by purchase and sale is called merchandising?
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
And have we not observed that one part of merchandising sells and exchanges for cash whatever serves the body for its support and needs, and the other whatever serves the soul?
Theaetetus
What do you mean by that?
Stranger
Perhaps we do not know about the part that has to do with the soul; though I fancy we do understand the other division.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
Take, therefore, the liberal arts in general that constantly go about from city to city, bought in one place and carried to another and sold painting, and conjuring, and the many other things that affect the soul, which are imported and sold partly for its entertainment and partly for its serious needs; we cannot deny that he who carries these about and sells them constitutes a merchant properly so called, no less than he whose business is the sale of food and drink.
Theaetetus
Very true.
Stranger
Then will you give the same name to him who buys up knowledge and goes about from city to city exchanging his wares for money?
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
One part of this soul-merchandising might very properly be called the art of display, might it not?
But since the other part, though no less ridiculous than the first, is nevertheless a traffic in knowledge, must we not call it by some name akin to its business?
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
Now of this merchandising in knowledge the part which has to do with the knowledge of the other arts should be called by one name, and that which has to do with virtue by another.
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
The name of art-merchant would fit the one who trades in the other arts, and now do you be so good as to tell the name of him who trades in virtue.
Theaetetus
And what other name could one give, without making a mistake, than that which is the object of our present investigation the sophist?
Stranger
No other.
Come then, let us now summarize the matter by saying that sophistry has appeared a second time as that part of acquisitive art, art of exchange, of trafficking, of merchandising, of soul-merchandising which deals in words and knowledge, and trades in virtue.
Theaetetus
Very well.
Stranger
But there is a third case: If a man settled down here in town and proposed to make his living by selling these same wares of knowledge, buying some of them and making others himself, you would, I fancy, not call him by any other name than that which you used a moment ago.
Theaetetus
Certainly not.
Stranger
Then also that part of acquisitive art which proceeds by exchange, and by sale, whether as mere retail trade or the sale of one's own productions, no matter which, so long as it is of the class of merchandising in knowledge, you will always, apparently, call sophistry.
Theaetetus
I must do so, for I have to follow where the argument leads.
Stranger
Let us examine further and see if the class we are now pursuing has still another aspect, of similar nature.
Theaetetus
Of what nature?
Stranger
We agreed that fighting was a division of acquisitive art.
Theaetetus
Yes, we did.
Stranger
Then it is quite fitting to divide it into two parts.
Theaetetus
Tell what the parts are.
Stranger
Let us call one part of it the competitive and the other the pugnacious.
Theaetetus
Agreed.
Stranger
Then it is reasonable and fitting to give to that part of the pugnacious which consists of bodily contests some such name as violent.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And what other name than controversy shall we give to the contests of words?
Theaetetus
No other.
Stranger
But controversy must be divided into two kinds.
Theaetetus
How?
Stranger
Whenever long speeches are opposed by long speeches on questions of justice and injustice in public, that is forensic controversy.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
But that which is carried on among private persons and is cut up into little bits by means of questions and their answers, we are accustomed to call argumentation, are we not?
Theaetetus
We are.
Stranger
And that part of argumentation which deals with business contracts, in which there is controversy, to be sure, but it is carried on informally and without rules of art all that must be considered a distinct class, now that our argument has recognized it as different from the rest, but it received no name from our predecessors, nor does it now deserve to receive one from us.
Theaetetus
True; for the divisions into which it falls are too small and too miscellaneous.
Stranger
But that which possesses rules of art and carries on controversy about abstract justice and injustice and the rest in general terms, we are accustomed to call disputation, are we not?
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
Well, of disputation, one sort wastes money, the other makes money.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
Then let us try to tell the name by which we must call each of these.
Theaetetus
Yes, we must do so.
Stranger
Presumably the kind which causes a man to neglect his own affairs for the pleasure of engaging in it, but the style of which causes no pleasure to most of his hearers, is, in my opinion, called by no other name than garrulity.
Theaetetus
Yes, that is about what it is called.
Stranger
Then the opposite of this, the kind which makes money from private disputes try now, for it is your turn, to give its name.
Theaetetus
What other answer could one give without making a mistake, than that now again for the fourth time that wonderful being whom we have so long been pursuing has turned up the sophist!
Stranger
Yes, and the sophist is nothing else, apparently, than the money-making class of the disputatious, argumentative, controversial, pugnacious, combative, acquisitive art, as our argument has now again stated.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
Do you see the truth of the statement that this creature is many-sided and, as the saying is, not to be caught with one hand?
Theaetetus
Then we must catch him with both.
Stranger
Yes, we must, and must go at it with all our might, by following another track of his in this way.
Tell me; of the expressions connected with menial occupations some are in common use, are they not?
Theaetetus
Yes, many.
But to which of the many does your question refer?
Stranger
To such as these: we say "sift" and "strain" and "winnow" and "separate."
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
And besides these there are "card" and "comb" and "beat the web" and countless other technical terms which we know.
Is it not so?
Stranger
All those that I have mentioned imply a notion of division.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
Then since there is, accorling to my reckoning, one art involved in all of these operations, let us give it one name.
Theaetetus
What shall we call it?
Stranger
The art of discrimination.
Theaetetus
Very well.
Stranger
Now see if we can discover two divisions of this.
Theaetetus
You demand quick thinking, for a boy like me.
Stranger
And yet, in the instance of discrimination just mentioned there was, first, the separation of worse from better, and, secondly, of like from like.
Theaetetus
Yes, as you now express it, that is pretty clear.
Stranger
Now I know no common name for the second kind of discrimination; but I do know the name of the kind which retains the better and throws away the worse.
Theaetetus
What is it?
Stranger
Every such discrimination, as I think, is universally called a sort of purification.
Theaetetus
Yes, so it is.
Stranger
And could not anyone see that purification is of two kinds?
Theaetetus
Yes, perhaps, in time; but still I do not see it now.
Stranger
Still there are many kinds of purifications of bodies, and they may all properly be included under one name.
Theaetetus
What are they and what is the name?
Stranger
The purification of living creatures, having to do with impurities within the body, such as are successfully discriminated by gymnastics and medicine, and with those outside of the body, not nice to speak of, such as are attended to by the bath-keeper's art; and the purification of inanimate bodies, which is the special care of the fuller's art and in general of the art of exterior decoration; this, with its petty subdivisions, has taken on many names which seem ridiculous.
Theaetetus
Very.
Stranger
Certainly they do, Theaetetus.
However, the method of argument is neither more nor less concerned with the art of medicine than with that of sponging, but is indifferent if the one benefits us little, the other greatly by its purifying.
It endeavors to understand what is related and what is not related in all arts, for the purpose of acquiring intelligence; and therefore it honors them all equally and does not in making comparisons think one more ridiculous than another, and does not consider him who employs, as his example of hunting, the art of generalship, any more dignified than him who employs the art of louse-catching, but only, for the most part, as more pretentious.
And now as to your question, what name we shall give to all the activities whose function it is to purify the body, whether animate or inanimate, it will not matter at all to our method what name sounds finest; it cares only to unite under one name all purifications of everything else and to keep them separate from the purification of the soul.
For it has in our present discussion been trying to separate this purification definitely from the rest, if we understand its desire.
Theaetetus
But I do understand and I agree that there are two kinds of purification and that one kind is the purification of the soul, which is separate from that of the body.
Stranger
Most excellent.
Now pay attention to the next point and try again to divide the term.
Theaetetus
In whatever way you suggest, I will try to help you in making the division.
Stranger
Do we say that wickedness is distinct from virtue in the soul?
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
And purification was retaining the one and throwing out whatever is bad anywhere?
Theaetetus
Yes, it was.
Stranger
Hence whenever we find any removal of evil from the soul, we shall be speaking properly if we call that a purification.
Theaetetus
Very properly.
Stranger
We must say that there are two kinds of evil in the soul.
Theaetetus
What kinds?
Stranger
The one is comparable to a disease in the body, the other to a deformity.
Theaetetus
I do not understand.
Stranger
Perhaps you have not considered that disease and discord are the same thing?
Theaetetus
I do not know what reply I ought to make to this, either.
Stranger
Is that because you think discord is anything else than the disagreement of the naturally related, brought about by some corruption?
Theaetetus
No; I think it is nothing else.
Stranger
But is deformity anything else than the presence of the quality of disproportion, which is always ugly?
Theaetetus
Nothing else at all.
Stranger
Well then; do we not see that in the souls of worthless men opinions are opposed to desires, anger to pleasures, reason to pain, and all such things to one another?
Theaetetus
Yes, they are, decidedly.
Stranger
Yet they must all be naturally related.
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
Then we shall be right if we say that wickedness is a discord and disease of the soul.
Theaetetus
Yes, quite right.
Stranger
But if things which partake of motion and aim at some particular mark pass beside the mark and miss it on every occasion when they try to hit it, shall we say that this happens to them through right proportion to one another or, on the contrary, through disproportion?
Theaetetus
Evidently through disproportion.
Stranger
But yet we know that every soul, if ignorant of anything, is ignorant against its will.
Theaetetus
Very much so.
Stranger
Now being ignorant is nothing else than the aberration of a soul that aims at truth, when the understanding passes beside the mark.
Theaetetus
Very true.
Stranger
Then we must regard a foolish soul as deformed and ill-proportioned.
Theaetetus
So it seems.
Stranger
Then there are, it appears, these two kinds of evils in the soul, one, which people call wickedness, which is very clearly a disease.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And the other they call ignorance, but they are not willing to acknowledge that it is vice, when it arises only in the soul.
Theaetetus
It must certainly be admitted, though I disputed it when you said it just now, that there are two kinds of vice in the soul, and that cowardice, intemperance, and injustice must all alike be considered a disease in us, and the widespread and various condition of ignorance must be regarded as a deformity.
Stranger
In the case of the body there are two arts which have to do with these two evil conditions, are there not?
Theaetetus
What are they?
Stranger
For deformity there is gymnastics, and for disease medicine.
Theaetetus
That is clear.
Stranger
Hence for insolence and injustice and cowardice is not the corrective art the one of all arts most closely related to Justice?
Theaetetus
Probably it is, at least according to the judgement of mankind.
Stranger
And for all sorts of ignorance is there any art it would be more correct to suggest than that of instruction?
Theaetetus
No, none.
Stranger
Come now, think.
Shall we say that there is only one kind of instruction, or that there are more and that two are the most important?
Theaetetus
I am thinking.
Stranger
I think we can find out most quickly in this way.
Theaetetus
In what way?
Stranger
By seeing whether ignorance admits of being cut in two in the middle;
for if ignorance turns out to be twofold, it is clear that instruction must also consist of two parts, one for each part of ignorance.
Theaetetus
Well, can you see what you are now looking for?
Stranger
I at any rate think I do see one large and grievous kind of ignorance, separate from the rest, and as weighty as all the other parts put together.
Theaetetus
What is it?
Stranger
Thinking that one knows a thing when one does not know it.
Through this, I believe, all the mistakes of the mind are caused in all of us.
Theaetetus
True.
Stranger
And furthermore to this kind of ignorance alone the name of stupidity is given.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
Now what name is to be given to that part of instruction which gets rid of this?
Theaetetus
I think, Stranger, that the other part is called instruction in handicraft, and that this part is here at Athens through our influence called education.
Stranger
And so it is, Theaetetus, among nearly all the Hellenes.
But we must examine further and see whether it is one and indivisible or still admits of division important enough to have a name.
Theaetetus
Yes, we must see about that.
Stranger
I think there is still a way in which this also may be divided.
Theaetetus
On what principle?
Stranger
Of instruction in arguments one method seems to be rougher, and the other section smoother.
Theaetetus
What shall we call each of these?
Stranger
The venerable method of our fathers, which they generally employed towards their sons, and which many still employ, of sometimes showing anger at their errors and sometimes more gently exhorting them that would most properly be called as a whole admonition.
Theaetetus
That is true.
Stranger
On the other hand, some appear to have convinced themselves that all ignorance is involuntary, and that he who thinks himself wise would never be willing to learn any of those things in which he believes he is clever, and that the admonitory kind of education takes a deal of trouble and accomplishes little.
Theaetetus
They are quite right.
Stranger
So they set themselves to cast out the conceit of cleverness in another way.
Theaetetus
In what way?
Stranger
They question a man about the things about which he thinks he is talking sense when he is talking nonsense;
then they easily discover that his opinions are like those of men who wander, and in their discussions they collect those opinions and compare them with one another, and by the comparison they show that they contradict one another about the same things, in relation to the same things and in respect to the same things.
But those who see this grow angry with themselves and gentle towards others,
and this is the way in which they are freed from their high and obstinate opinions about themselves.
The process of freeing them, moreover, affords the greatest pleasure to the listeners and the most lasting benefit to him who is subjected to it.
For just as physicians who care for the body believe that the body cannot get benefit from any food offered to it until all obstructions are removed,
those who purge the soul, my dear boy, believe that the soul can receive no benefit from any teachings offered to it until someone by cross-questioning reduces him who is cross-questioned to an attitude of modesty, by removing the opinions that obstruct the teachings, and thus purges him and makes him think that he knows only what he knows, and no more.
Theaetetus
That is surely the best and most reasonable state of mind.
Stranger
For all these reasons, Theaetetus, we must assert that cross-questioning is the greatest and most efficacious of all purifications, and that he who is not cross-questioned, even though he be the Great King, has not been purified of the greatest taints, and is therefore uneducated and deformed in those things in which he who is to be truly happy ought to be most pure and beautiful.
Theaetetus
Perfectly true.
Stranger
Well then, who are those who practise this art?
I am afraid to say the sophists.
Theaetetus
Why so?
Stranger
Lest we grant them too high a meed of honor.
Theaetetus
But the description you have just given is very like someone of that sort.
Stranger
Yes, and a wolf is very like a dog, the wildest like the tamest of animals.
But the cautious man must be especially on his guard in the matter of resemblances, for they are very slippery things.
However, let us agree that they are the sophists; for I think the strife will not be about petty discriminations when people are sufficiently on their guard.
Theaetetus
No, probably not.
Stranger
Then let it be agreed that part of the discriminating art is purification, and as part of purification let that which is concerned with the soul be separated off, and as part of this, instruction, and as part of instruction, education; and let us agree that the cross-questioning of empty conceit of wisdom, which has come to light in our present discussion, is nothing else than the true-born art of sophistry.
Theaetetus
Let us agree to all that; but the sophist has by this time appeared to be so many things that I am at a loss to know what in the world to say he really is, with any assurance that I am speaking the truth.
Stranger
No wonder you are at a loss.
But it is fair to suppose that by this time he is still more at a loss to know how he can any longer elude our argument; for the proverb is right which says it is not easy to escape all the wrestler's grips.
So now we must attack him with redoubled vigor.
Theaetetus
You are right.
Stranger
First, then, let us stop to take breath and while we are resting let us count up the number of forms in which the sophist has appeared to us.
First, I believe, he was found to be a paid hunter after the young and wealthy.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And secondly a kind of merchant in articles of knowledge for the soul.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
And thirdly did he not turn up as a retailer of these same articles of knowledge?
Theaetetus
Yes, and fourthly we found he was a seller of his own productions of knowledge.
Stranger
Your memory is good;
but I will try to recall the fifth case myself.
He was an athlete in contests of words, who had taken for his own the art of disputation.
Theaetetus
Yes, he was.
Stranger
The sixth case was doubtful, but nevertheless we agreed to consider him a purger of souls, who removes opinions that obstruct learning.
Theaetetus
Very true.
Stranger
Then do you see that when a man appears to know many things, but is called by the name of a single art, there is something wrong about this impression, and that, in fact, the person who labors under this impression in connexion with any art is clearly unable to see the common principle of the art, to which all these kinds of knowledge pertain, so that he calls him who possesses them by many names instead of one?
Theaetetus
Something like that is very likely to be the case.
Stranger
We must not let that happen to us in our search through lack of diligence.
So let us first take up again one of our statements about the sophist.
For there is one of them which seemed to me to designate him most plainly.
Theaetetus
Which was it?
Stranger
I think we said he was a disputer.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And did we not also say that he taught this same art of disputing to others?
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
Now let us examine and see what the subjects are about which such men say they make their pupils able to dispute.
Let us begin our examination at the beginning with this question:
Is it about divine things which are invisible to others that they make people able to dispute?
Theaetetus
That is their reputation, at any rate.
Stranger
And how about the visible things of earth and heaven and the like?
Theaetetus
Those are included, of course.
Stranger
And furthermore in private conversations, when the talk is about generation and being in general, we know (do we not?) that they are clever disputants themselves and impart equal ability to others.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
And how about laws and public affairs in general?
Do they not promise to make men able to argue about those?
Theaetetus
Yes, for nobody, to speak broadly, would attend their classes if they did not make that promise.
Stranger
However in all arts jointly and severally what the professional ought to answer to every opponent is written down somewhere and published that he who will may learn.
Theaetetus
You seem to refer to the text-books of Protagoras on wrestling and the other arts.
Stranger
Yes, my friend, and to those of many other authors.
But is not the art of disputation, in a word, a trained ability for arguing about all things?
Theaetetus
Well, at any rate, it does not seem to leave much out.
Stranger
For heaven's sake, my boy, do you think that is possible?
For perhaps you young people may look at the matter with sharper vision than our duller sight.
Theaetetus
What do you mean and just what do you refer to?
I do not yet understand your question.
Stranger
I ask whether it is possible for a man to know all things.
Theaetetus
If that were possible, Stranger, ours would indeed be a blessed race.
Stranger
How, then, can one who is himself ignorant say anything worth while in arguing with one who knows?
Theaetetus
He cannot at all.
Stranger
Then what in the world can the magical power of the sophistical art be?
Theaetetus
Magical power in what respect?
Stranger
In the way in which they are able to make young men think that they themselves are in all matters the wisest of men.
For it is clear that if they neither disputed correctly nor seemed to the young men to do so, or again if they did seem to dispute rightly but were not considered wiser on that account, nobody, to quote from you, would care to pay them money to become their pupil in these subjects.
Theaetetus
Certainly not.
Stranger
But now people do care to do so?
Theaetetus
Very much.
Stranger
Yes, for they are supposed, I fancy, to have knowledge themselves of the things about which they dispute.
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
And they do that about all things, do they not?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
Then they appear to their pupils to be wise in all things.
Theaetetus
To be sure.
Stranger
Though they are not; for that was shown to be impossible.
Theaetetus
Of course it is impossible.
Stranger
Then it is a sort of knowledge based upon mere opinion that the sophist has been shown to possess about all things, not true knowledge.
Theaetetus
Certainly; and I shouldn't be surprised if that were the most accurate statement we have made about him so far.
Stranger
Let us then take a clearer example to explain this.
Theaetetus
What sort of an example?
Stranger
This one;
and try to pay attention and to give a very careful answer to my question.
Theaetetus
What is the question?
Stranger
If anyone should say that by virtue of a single art he knew how, not to assert or dispute, but to do and make all things
Theaetetus
What do you mean by all things?
Stranger
You fail to grasp the very beginning of what I said; for apparently you do not understand the word "all."
Theaetetus
No, I do not.
Stranger
I mean you and me among the "all," and the other animals besides, and the trees.
Theaetetus
What do you mean?
Stranger
If one should say that he would make you and me and all other created beings.
Theaetetus
What would he mean by "making"?
Evidently you will not say that he means a husbandman; for you said he was a maker of animals also.
Stranger
Yes, and of sea and earth and heaven and gods and everything else besides; and, moreover, he makes them all quickly and sells them for very little.
Theaetetus
This is some joke of yours.
Stranger
Yes?
And when a man says that he knows all things and can teach them to another for a small price in a little time, must we not consider that a joke?
Theaetetus
Surely we must.
Stranger
And is there any more artistic or charming kind of joke than the imitative kind?
Theaetetus
Certainly not; for it is of very frequent occurrence and, if I may say so, most diverse.
Your expression is very comprehensive.
Stranger
And so we recognize that he who professes to be able by virtue of a single art to make all things will be able by virtue of the painter's art, to make imitations which have the same names as the real things, and by showing the pictures at a distance will be able to deceive the duller ones among young children into the belief that he is perfectly able to accomplish in fact whatever he wishes to do.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
Well then, may we not expect to find that there is another art which has to do with words, by virtue of which it is possible to bewitch the young through their ears with words while they are still standing at a distance from the realities of truth, by exhibiting to them spoken images of all things, so as to make it seem that they are true and that the speaker is the wisest of all men in all things?
Theaetetus
Why should there not be such another art?
Stranger
Now most of the hearers, Theaetetus, when they have lived longer and grown older, will perforce come closer to realities and will be forced by sad experience openly to lay hold on realities; they will have to change the opinions which they had at first accepted, so that what was great will appear small and what was easy, difficult, and all the apparent truths in arguments will be turned topsy-turvy by the facts that have come upon them in real life, Is not this true?
Theaetetus
Yes, at least so far as one of my age can judge.
But I imagine I am one of those who are still standing at a distance.
Stranger
Therefore all of us elders here will try, and are now trying, to bring you as near as possible without the sad experience.
So answer this question about the sophist: Is this now clear, that he is a kind of a juggler, an imitator of realities, or are we still uncertain whether he may not truly possess the knowledge of all the things about which he seems to be able to argue?
Theaetetus
How could that be, my dear sir?
Surely it is pretty clear by this time from what has been said that he is one of those whose business is entertainment.
Stranger
That is to say, he must be classed as a juggler and imitator.
Theaetetus
Of course he must.
Stranger
Look sharp, then; it is now our business not to let the beast get away again, for we have almost got him into a kind of encircling net of the devices we employ in arguments about such subjects, so that he will not now escape the next thing.
Theaetetus
What next thing?
Stranger
The conclusion that he belongs to the class of conjurers.
Theaetetus
I agree to that opinion of him, too.
Stranger
It is decided, then, that we will as quickly as possible divide the image-making art and go down into it, and if the sophist stands his ground against us at first, we will seize him by the orders of reason, our king, then deliver him up to the king and display his capture.
But if he tries to take cover in any of the various sections of the imitative art, we must follow him, always dividing the section into which he has retreated, until he is caught.
For assuredly neither he nor any other creature will ever boast of having escaped from pursuers who are able to follow up the pursuit in detail and everywhere in this methodical way.
Theaetetus
You are right.
That is what we must do.
Stranger
To return, then, to our previous method of division, I think I see this time also two classes of imitation, but I do not yet seem to be able to make out in which of them the form we are seeking is to be found.
Theaetetus
Please first make the division and tell us what two classes you mean.
Stranger
I see the likeness-making art as one part of imitation.
This is met with, as a rule, whenever anyone produces the imitation by following the proportions of the original in length, breadth, and depth, and giving, besides, the appropriate colors to each part.
Theaetetus
Yes, but do not all imitators try to do this?
Stranger
Not those who produce some large work of sculpture or painting.
For if they reproduced the true proportions of beautiful forms, the upper parts, you know, would seem smaller and the lower parts larger than they ought, because we see the former from a distance, the latter from near at hand.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
So the artists abandon the truth and give their figures not the actual proportions but those which seem to be beautiful, do they not?
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
That, then, which is other, but like, we may fairly call a likeness, may we not?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And the part of imitation which is concerned with such things, is to be called, as we called it before, likeness-making?
Theaetetus
It is to be so called.
Stranger
Now then, what shall we call that which appears, because it is seen from an unfavorable position, to be like the beautiful, but which would not even be likely to resemble that which it claims to be like, if a person were able to see such large works adequately?
Shall we not call it, since it appears, but is not like, an appearance?
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
And this is very common in painting and in all imitation?
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
And to the art which produces appearance, but not likeness, the most correct name we could give would be "fantastic art," would it not?
Theaetetus
By all means.
Stranger
These, then, are the two forms of the image-making art that I meant, the likeness-making and the fantastic.
Theaetetus
You are right.
Stranger
But I was uncertain before in which of the two the sophist should be placed, and even now I cannot see clearly.
The fellow is really wonderful and very difficult to keep in sight, for once more, in the very cleverest manner he has withdrawn into a baffling classification where it is hard to track him.
Theaetetus
So it seems.
Stranger
Do you assent because you recognize the fact, or did the force of habit hurry you along to a speedy assent?
Theaetetus
What do you mean, and why did you say that?
Stranger
We are really, my dear friend, engaged in a very difficult investigation;
for the matter of appearing and seeming, but not being, and of saying things, but not true ones all this is now and always has been very perplexing.
You see, Theaetetus, it is extremely difficult to understand how a man is to say or think that falsehood really exists and in saying this not be involved in contradiction.
Theaetetus
Why?
Stranger
This statement involves the bold assumption that not-being exists, for otherwise falsehood could not come into existence.
But the great Parmenides, my boy, from the time when we were children to the end of his life, always protested against this and constantly repeated both in prose and in verse:"Never let this thought prevail, saith he, that not-being is;
But keep your mind from this way of investigation."
So that is his testimony, and a reasonable examination of the statement itself would make it most absolutely clear.
Let us then consider this matter first, if it's all the same to you.
Theaetetus
Assume my consent to anything you wish.
Consider only the argument, how it may best be pursued; follow your own course, and take me along with you.
Stranger
Very well, then.
Now tell me; do we venture to use the phrase absolute not-being?
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
If, then, not merely for the sake of discussion or as a joke, but seriously, one of his pupils were asked to consider and answer the question "To what is the designation 'not-being' to be applied?"
how do we think he would reply to his questioner, and how would he apply the term, for what purpose, and to what object?
Theaetetus
That is a difficult question; I may say that for a fellow like me it is unanswerable.
Stranger
But this is clear, anyhow, that the term "not-being" cannot be applied to any being.
Theaetetus
Of course not.
Stranger
And if not to being, then it could not properly be applied to something, either.
Theaetetus
How could it?
Stranger
And this is plain to us, that we always use the word "something" of some being, for to speak of "something" in the abstract, naked, as it were, and disconnected from all beings is impossible, is it not?
Theaetetus
Yes, it is.
Stranger
You assent because you recognize that he who says something must say some one thing?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And you will agree that "something" or "some" in the singular is the sign of one, in the dual of two, and in the plural of many.
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
And he who says not something, must quite necessarily say absolutely nothing.
Theaetetus
Quite necessarily.
Stranger
Then we cannot even concede that such a person speaks, but says nothing?
We must even declare that he who undertakes to say "not-being" does not speak at all?
Theaetetus
The argument could go no further in perplexity.
Stranger
Boast not too soon!
For there still remains, my friend, the first and greatest of perplexities.
It affects the very beginning of the matter.
Theaetetus
What do you mean?
Do not hesitate to speak.
Stranger
To that which is may be added or attributed some other thing which is?
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
But shall we assert that to that which is not anything which is can be attributed?
Theaetetus
Certainly not.
Stranger
Now we assume that all number is among the things which are.
Theaetetus
Yes, if anything can be assumed to be.
Stranger
Then let us not even undertake to attribute either the singular or the plural of number to not-being.
Theaetetus
We should, apparently, not be right in undertaking that, as our argument shows.
Stranger
How then could a man either utter in speech or even so much as conceive in his mind things which are not, or not-being, apart from number?
Theaetetus
Tell me how number is involved in such conceptions.
Stranger
When we say "things which are not," do we not attribute plurality to them?
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
And in saying "a thing which is not," do we not equally attribute the singular number?
Theaetetus
Obviously.
Stranger
And yet we assert that it is neither right nor fair to undertake to attribute being to not-being.
Theaetetus
Very true.
Stranger
Do you see, then, that it is impossible rightly to utter or to say or to think of not-being without any attribute, but it is a thing inconceivable, inexpressible, unspeakable, irrational?
Theaetetus
Absolutely.
Stranger
Then was I mistaken just now in saying that the difficulty I was going to speak of was the greatest in our subject.
Theaetetus
But is there a still greater one that we can mention?
Stranger
Why, my dear fellow, don't you see, by the very arguments we have used, that not-being reduces him who would refute it to such difficulties that when he attempts to refute it he is forced to contradict himself?
Theaetetus
What do you mean?
Speak still more clearly.
Stranger
You must not look for more clearness in me;
for although I maintained that not-being could have nothing to do with either the singular or the plural number, I spoke of it just now, and am still speaking of it, as one; for I say "that which is not."
You understand surely?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And again a little while ago I said it was inexpressible, unspeakable, irrational.
Do you follow me?
Theaetetus
I follow.
Yes, of course.
Stranger
Then when I undertook to attach the verb "to be" to not-being I was contradicting what I said before.
Theaetetus
Evidently.
Stranger
Well, then; when I attached this verb to it, did I not address it in the singular?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And when I called it irrational, inexpressible, and unspeakable, I addressed my speech to it as singular.
Theaetetus
Of course you did.
Stranger
But we say that, if one is to speak correctly, one must not define it as either singular or plural, and must not even call it "it" at all; for even by this manner of referring to it one would be giving it the form of the singular.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
But poor me, what can anyone say of me any longer?
For you would find me now, as always before, defeated in the refutation of not-being.
So, as I said before, we must not look to me for correctness of speech about not-being.
But come now, let us look to you for it.
Theaetetus
What do you mean?
Stranger
Come, I beg of you, make a sturdy effort, young man as you are, and try with might and main to say something correctly about not-being, without attributing to it either existence or unity or plurality.
Theaetetus
But I should be possessed of great and absurd eagerness for the attempt, if I were to undertake it with your experience before my eyes.
Stranger
Well, if you like, let us say no more of you and me; but until we find someone who can accomplish this, let us confess that the sophist has in most rascally fashion hidden himself in a place we cannot explore.
Theaetetus
That seems to be decidedly the case.
Stranger
And so, if we say he has an art, as it were, of making appearances, he will easily take advantage of our poverty of terms to make a counter attack, twisting our words to the opposite meaning; when we call him an image-maker, he will ask us what we mean by "image," exactly.
So, Theaetetus, we must see what reply is to be made to the young man's question.
Theaetetus
Obviously we shall reply that we mean the images in water and in mirrors, and those in paintings, too, and sculptures, and all the other things of the same sort.
Stranger
It is evident, Theaetetus, that you never saw a sophist.
Theaetetus
Why?
Stranger
He will make you think his eyes are shut or he has none at all.
Theaetetus
How so?
Stranger
When you give this answer, if you speak of something in mirrors or works of art, he will laugh at your words, when you talk to him as if he could see.
He will feign ignorance of mirrors and water and of sight altogether, and will question you only about that which is deduced from your words.
Theaetetus
What is that?
Stranger
That which exists throughout all these things which you say are many but which you saw fit to call by one name, when you said "image" of them all, as if they were all one thing.
So speak and defend yourself, Do not give way to the man at all.
Theaetetus
Why, Stranger, what can we say an image is, except another such thing fashioned in the likeness of the true one?
Stranger
Do you mean another such true one, or in what sense did you say "such"?
Theaetetus
Not a true one by any means, but only one like the true.
Stranger
And by the true you mean that which really is?
Theaetetus
Exactly.
Stranger
And the not true is the opposite of the true?
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
That which is like, then, you say does not really exist, if you say it is not true.
Theaetetus
But it does exist, in a way.
Stranger
But not truly, you mean.
Theaetetus
No, except that it is really a likeness.
Stranger
Then what we call a likeness, though not really existing, really does exist?
Theaetetus
Not-being does seem to have got into some such entanglement with being, and it is very absurd.
Stranger
Of course it is absurd.
You see, at any rate, how by this interchange of words the many-headed sophist has once more forced us against our will to admit that not-being exists in a way.
Theaetetus
Yes, I see that very well.
Stranger
Well then, how can we define his art without contradicting ourselves?
Theaetetus
Why do you say that?
What are you afraid of?
Stranger
When, in talking about appearance, we say that he deceives and that his art is an art of deception, shall we say that our mind is misled by his art to hold a false opinion, or what shall we say?
Theaetetus
We shall say that.
What else could we say?
Stranger
But, again, false opinion will be that which thinks the opposite of reality, will it not?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
You mean, then, that false opinion thinks things which are not?
Theaetetus
Necessarily.
Stranger
Does it think that things which are not, are not, or that things which are not at all, in some sense are?
Theaetetus
It must think that things which are not in some sense are that is, if anyone is ever to think falsely at all, even in a slight degree.
Stranger
And does it not also think that things which certainly are, are not at all?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And this too is falsehood?
Theaetetus
Yes, it is,
Stranger
And therefore a statement will likewise be considered false, if it declares that things which are, are not, or that things which are not, are.
Theaetetus
In what other way could a statement be made false?
Stranger
Virtually in no other way; but the sophist will not assent to this.
Or how can any reasonable man assent to it, when the expressions we just agreed upon were previously agreed to be inexpressible, unspeakable, irrational, and inconceivable?
Do we understand his meaning, Theaetetus?
Theaetetus
Of course we understand that he will say we are contradicting our recent statements, since we dare to say that falsehood exists in opinions and words;
for he will say that we are thus forced repeatedly to attribute being to not-being, although we agreed a while ago that nothing could be more impossible than that.
Stranger
You are quite right to remind me.
But I think it is high time to consider what ought to be done about the sophist; for you see how easily and repeatedly he can raise objections and difficulties, if we conduct our search by putting him in the guild of false-workers and jugglers.
Theaetetus
Very true.
Stranger
Yes, we have gone through only a small part of them, and they are, if I may say so, infinite.
Theaetetus
It would, apparently, be impossible to catch the sophist, if that is the case.
Stranger
Well, then, shall we weaken and give up the struggle now?
Theaetetus
No, I say; we must not do that, if we can in any way get the slightest hold of the fellow.
Stranger
Will you then pardon me, and, as your words imply, be content if I somehow withdraw just for a short distance from this strong argument of his?
Theaetetus
Of course I will.
Stranger
I have another still more urgent request to make of you.
Theaetetus
What is it?
Stranger
Do not assume that I am becoming a sort of parricide.
Theaetetus
What do you mean?
Stranger
In defending myself I shall have to test the theory of my father Parmenides, and contend forcibly that after a fashion not-being is and on the other hand in a sense being is not.
Theaetetus
It is plain that some such contention is necessary.
Stranger
Yes, plain even to a blind man, as they say;
for unless these statements are either disproved or accepted, no one who speaks about false words, or false opinion whether images or likenesses or imitations or appearances about the arts which have to do with them, can ever help being forced to contradict himself and make himself ridiculous.
Theaetetus
Very true.
Stranger
And so we must take courage and attack our father's theory here and now, or else, if any scruples prevent us from doing this, we must give the whole thing up.
Theaetetus
But nothing in the world must prevent us.
Stranger
Then I have a third little request to make of you.
Theaetetus
You have only to utter it.
Stranger
I said a while ago that I always have been too faint-hearted for the refutation of this theory, and so I am now.
Theaetetus
Yes, so you did.
Stranger
I am afraid that on account of what I have said you will think I am mad because I have at once reversed my position.
You see it is for your sake that I am going to undertake the refutation, if I succeed in it.
Theaetetus
I certainly shall not think you are doing anything improper if you proceed to your refutation and proof; so go ahead boldly, so far as that is concerned.
Stranger
Well, what would be a good beginning of a perilous argument?
Ah, my boy, I believe the way we certainly must take is this.
Theaetetus
What way?
Stranger
We must first examine the points which now seem clear, lest we may have fallen into some confusion about them and may therefore carelessly agree with one another, thinking that we are judging correctly.
Theaetetus
Express your meaning more clearly.
Stranger
It seems to me that Parmenides and all who ever undertook a critical definition of the number and nature of realities have talked to us rather carelessly.
Theaetetus
How so?
Stranger
Every one of them seems to tell us a story, as if we were children.
One says there are three principles, that some of them are sometimes waging a sort of war with each other, and sometimes become friends and marry and have children and bring them up; and another says there are two, wet and dry or hot and cold, which he settles together and unites in marriage.
And the Eleatic sect in our region, beginning with Xenophanes and even earlier, have their story that all things, as they are called, are really one.
Then some Ionian and later some Sicilian Muses reflected that it was safest to combine the two tales and to say that being is many and one, and is (or are) held together by enmity and friendship.
For the more strenuous Muses say it is always simultaneously coming together and separating; but the gentler ones relaxed the strictness of the doctrine of perpetual strife; they say that the all is sometimes one and friendly, under the influence of Aphrodite, and sometimes many and at variance with itself by reason of some sort of strife.
Now whether any of them spoke the truth in all this, or not, it is harsh and improper to impute to famous men of old such a great wrong as falsehood.
But one assertion can be made without offence.
Theaetetus
What is that?
Stranger
That they paid too little attention and consideration to the mass of people like ourselves.
For they go on to the end, each in his own way, without caring whether their arguments carry us along with them, or whether we are left behind.
Theaetetus
What do you mean?
Stranger
When one of them says in his talk that many, or one, or two are, or have become, or are becoming, and again speaks of hot mingling with cold, and in some other part of his discourse suggests separations and combinations, for heaven's sake, Theaetetus, do you ever understand what they mean by any of these things?
I used to think, when I was younger, that I understood perfectly whenever anyone used this term "not-being," which now perplexes us.
But you see what a slough of perplexity we are in about it now.
Theaetetus
Yes, I see.
Stranger
And perhaps our minds are in this same condition as regards being also; we may think that it is plain sailing and that we understand when the word is used, though we are in difficulties about not-being, whereas really we understand equally little of both.
Theaetetus
Perhaps.
Stranger
And we may say the same of all the subjects about which we have been speaking.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
We will consider most of them later, if you please, but now the greatest and foremost chief of them must be considered.
Theaetetus
What do you mean?
Or, obviously, do you mean that we must first investigate the term "being," and see what those who use it think it signifies?
Stranger
You have caught my meaning at once, Theaetetus.
For I certainly do mean that this is the best method for us to use, by questioning them directly, as if they were present in person; so here goes: Come now, all you who say that hot and cold or any two such principles are the universe, what is this that you attribute to both of them when you say that both and each are?
What are we to understand by this "being" (or "are") of yours?
Is this a third principle besides those two others, and shall we suppose that the universe is three, and not two any longer, according to your doctrine?
For surely when you call one only of the two "being" you do not mean that both of them equally are; for in both cases they would pretty certainly be one and not two.
Theaetetus
True.
Stranger
Well, then, do you wish to call both of them together being?
Theaetetus
Perhaps.
Stranger
But, friends, we will say, even in that way you would very clearly be saying that the two are one.
Theaetetus
You are perfectly right.
Stranger
Then since we are in perplexity, do you tell us plainly what you wish to designate when you say "being."
For it is clear that you have known this all along, whereas we formerly thought we knew, but are now perplexed.
So first give us this information, that we may not think we understand what you say, when the exact opposite is the case. If we speak in this way and make this request of them and of all who say that the universe is more than one, shall we, my boy, be doing anything improper?
Theaetetus
Not in the least.
Stranger
Well then, must we not, so far as we can, try to learn from those who say that the universe is one what they mean when they say "being"?
Theaetetus
Of course we must.
Stranger
Then let them answer this question: Do you say that one only is?
We do, they will say;
will they not?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
Well then, do you give the name of being to anything?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
Is it what you call "one," using two names for the same thing, or how is this?
Theaetetus
What is their next answer, Stranger?
Stranger
It is plain, Theaetetus, that he who maintains their theory will not find it the easiest thing in the world to reply to our present question or to any other.
Theaetetus
Why not?
Stranger
It is rather ridiculous to assert that two names exist when you assert that nothing exists but unity.
Theaetetus
Of course it is.
Stranger
And in general there would be no sense in accepting the statement that a name has any existence.
Theaetetus
Why?
Stranger
Because he who asserts that the name is other than the thing, says that there are two entities.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And further, if he asserts that the name is the same as the thing, he will be obliged to say that it is the name of nothing, or if he says it is the name of something, the name will turn out to be the name of a name merely and of nothing else.
Theaetetus
True.
Stranger
And the one will turn out to be the name of one and also the one of the name.
Theaetetus
Necessarily.
Stranger
And will they say that the whole is other than the one which exists or the same with it?
Theaetetus
Of course they will and do say it is the same.
Stranger
If then the whole is, as Parmenides says,"On all sides like the mass of a well-rounded sphere,
equally weighted in every direction from the middle;
for neither greater nor less must needs be on this or that,"
then being, being such as he describes it, has a center and extremes, and, having these, must certainly have parts, must it not?
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
But yet nothing hinders that which has parts from possessing the attribute of unity in all its parts and being in this way one, since it is all and whole.
Theaetetus
Very true.
Stranger
But is it not impossible for that which is in this condition to be itself absolute unity?
Theaetetus
Why?
Stranger
Why surely that which is really one must, according to right reason, be affirmed to be absolutely without parts.
Theaetetus
Yes, it must.
Stranger
But such a unity consisting of many parts will not harmonize with reason.
Theaetetus
I understand.
Stranger
Then shall we agree that being is one and a whole because it has the attribute of unity, or shall we deny that being is a whole at all?
Theaetetus
It is a hard choice that you offer me.
Stranger
That is very true;
for being, having in a way had unity imposed upon it, will evidently not be the same as unity, and the all will be more than one.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And further, if being is not a whole through having had the attribute of unity imposed upon it, and the absolute whole exists, then it turns out that being lacks something of being.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
And so, by this reasoning, since being is deprived of being, it will be not-being.
Theaetetus
So it will.
Stranger
And again the all becomes more than the one, since being and the whole have acquired each its own nature.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
But if the whole does not exist at all, being is involved in the same difficulties as before, and besides not existing it could not even have ever come into existence
Theaetetus
What do you mean?
Stranger
That which comes into existence always comes into existence as a whole.
Therefore no one who does not reckon the whole among things that are can speak of existence or generation as being.
Theaetetus
That certainly seems to be true.
Stranger
And moreover, that which is not a whole cannot have any quantity at all; for if it has any quantity, whatever that quantity may be, it must necessarily be of that quantity as a whole.
Theaetetus
Precisely.
Stranger
And so countless other problems, each one involving infinite difficulties, will confront him who says that being is, whether it be two or only one.
Theaetetus
The problems now in sight make that pretty clear; for each leads up to another which brings greater and more grievous wandering in connection with whatever has previously been said.
Stranger
Now we have not discussed all those who treat accurately of being and not-being; however, let this suffice.
But we must turn our eyes to those whose doctrines are less precise, that we may know from all sources that it is no easier to define the nature of being than that of not-being.
Theaetetus
Very well, then, we must proceed towards those others also.
Stranger
And indeed there seems to be a battle like that of the gods and the giants going on among them, because of their disagreement about existence.
Theaetetus
How so?
Stranger
Some of them drag down everything from heaven and the invisible to earth, actually grasping rocks and trees with their hands;
for they lay their hands on all such things and maintain stoutly that that alone exists which can be touched and handled; for they define existence and body, or matter, as identical, and if anyone says that anything else, which has no body, exists, they despise him utterly, and will not listen to any other theory than their own.
Theaetetus
Terrible men they are of whom you speak.
I myself have met with many of them.
Stranger
Therefore those who contend against them defend themselves very cautiously with weapons derived from the invisible world above, maintaining forcibly that real existence consists of certain ideas which are only conceived by the mind and have no body.
But the bodies of their opponents, and that which is called by them truth, they break up into small fragments in their arguments, calling them, not existence, but a kind of generation combined with motion.
There is always, Theaetetus, a tremendous battle being fought about these questions between the two parties.
Theaetetus
True.
Stranger
Let us, therefore, get from each party in turn a statement in defence of that which they regard as being.
Theaetetus
How shall we get it?
Stranger
It is comparatively easy to get it from those who say that it consists in ideas, for they are peaceful folk; but from those who violently drag down everything into matter, it is more difficult, perhaps even almost impossible, to get it.
However, this is the way I think we must deal with them.
Theaetetus
What way?
Stranger
Our first duty would be to make them really better, if it were in any way possible;
but if this cannot be done, let us pretend that they are better, by assuming that they would be willing to answer more in accordance with the rules of dialectic than they actually are.
For the acknowledgement of anything by better men is more valid than if made by worse men.
But it is not these men that we care about; we merely seek the truth.
Theaetetus
Quite right.
Stranger
Now tell them, assuming that they have become better, to answer you, and do you interpret what they say.
Theaetetus
I will do so.
Stranger
Let them tell whether they say there is such a thing as a mortal animal.
Theaetetus
Of course they do.
Stranger
And they agree that this is a body with a soul in it, do they not?
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
Giving to soul a place among things which exist?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
Well then, do they not say that one soul is just and another unjust, one wise and another foolish?
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
And do they not say that each soul becomes just by the possession and presence of justice, and the opposite by the possession and presence of the opposite?
Theaetetus
Yes, they agree to this also.
Stranger
But surely they will say that that which is capable of becoming present or absent exists.
Theaetetus
Yes, they say that.
Stranger
Granting, then, that justice and wisdom and virtue in general and their opposites exist, and also, of course, the soul in which they become present, do they say that any of these is visible and tangible, or that they are all invisible?
Theaetetus
That none of them is visible, or pretty nearly that.
Stranger
Now here are some other questions.
Do they say they possess any body?
Theaetetus
They no longer answer the whole of that question in the same way.
They say they believe the soul itself has a sort of body, but as to wisdom and the other several qualities about which you ask, they have not the face either to confess that they have no existence or to assert that they are all bodies.
Stranger
It is clear, Theaetetus, that our men have grown better; for the aboriginal sons of the dragon's teeth among them would not shrink from any such utterance; they would maintain that nothing which they cannot squeeze with their hands has any existence at all.
Theaetetus
That is pretty nearly what they believe.
Stranger
Then let us question them further; for if they are willing to admit that any existence, no matter how small, is incorporeal, that is enough.
They will then have to tell what is which is inherent in the incorporeal and the corporeal alike, and which they have in mind when they say that both exit.
Perhaps they would be at a loss for an answer; and if they are in that condition, consider whether they might not accept a suggestion if we offered it, and might not agree that the nature of being is as follows.
Theaetetus
What is it?
Speak, and we shall soon know.
Stranger
I suggest that everything which possesses any power of any kind, either to produce a change in anything of any nature or to be affected even in the least degree by the slightest cause, though it be only on one occasion, has real existence.
For I set up as a definition which defines being, that it is nothing else but power.
Theaetetus
Well, since they have at the moment nothing better of their own to offer, they accept this.
Stranger
Good; for perhaps later something else may occur to them and to us.
As between them and us, then, let us asume that this is for the present agreed upon and settled.
Theaetetus
It is settled.
Stranger
Then let us go to the others, the friends of ideas; and do you interpret for us their doctrines also.
Theaetetus
I will.
Stranger
You distinguish in your speech between generation and being, do you not?
Theaetetus
Yes, we do.
Stranger
And you say that with the body, by means of perception, we participate in generation, and with the soul, by means of thought, we participate in real being, which last is always unchanged and the same, whereas generation is different at different times.
Theaetetus
Yes, that is what we say.
Stranger
But, most excellent men, how shall we define this participation which you attribute to both?
Is it not that of which we were just speaking?
Theaetetus
What is that?
Stranger
A passive or active condition arising out of some power which is derived from a combination of elements.
Possibly, Theaetetus, you do not hear their reply to this, but I hear it, perhaps, because I am used to them.
Theaetetus
What is it, then, that they say?
Stranger
They do not concede to us what we said just now to the aboriginal giants about being.
Theaetetus
What was it?
Stranger
We set up as a satisfactory sort of definition of being, the presence of the power to act or be acted upon in even the slightest degree.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
It is in reply to this that they say generation participates in the power of acting and of being acted upon, but that neither power is connected with being.
Theaetetus
And is there not something in that?
Stranger
Yes, something to which we must reply that we still need to learn more clearly from them whether they agree that the soul knows and that being is known.
Theaetetus
They certainly assent to that.
Stranger
Well then, do you say that knowing or being known is an active or passive condition, or both?
Or that one is passive and the other active?
Or that neither has any share at all in either of the two?
Theaetetus
Clearly they would say that neither has any share in either; for otherwise they would be contradicting themselves.
Stranger
I understand; this at least is true, that if to know is active, to be known must in turn be passive.
Now being, since it is, according to this theory, known by the intelligence, in so far as it is known, is moved, since it is acted upon, which we say cannot be the case with that which is in a state of rest.
Theaetetus
Right.
Stranger
But for heaven's sake,
shall we let ourselves easily be persuaded that motion and life and soul and mind are really not present to absolute being, that it neither lives nor thinks, but awful and holy, devoid of mind, is fixed and immovable?
Theaetetus
That would be a shocking admission to make, Stranger.
Stranger
But shall we say that it has mind, but not life?
Theaetetus
How can we?
Stranger
But do we say that both of these exist in it, and yet go on to say that it does not possess them in a soul?
Theaetetus
But how else can it possess them?
Stranger
Then shall we say that it has mind and life and soul, but, although endowed with soul, is absolutely immovable?
Theaetetus
All those things seem to me absurd.
Stranger
And it must be conceded that motion and that which is moved exist.
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
Then the result is, Theaetetus, that if there is no motion, there is no mind in anyone about anything anywhere.
Theaetetus
Exactly.
Stranger
And on the other hand, if we admit that all things are in flux and motion, we shall remove mind itself from the number of existing things by this theory also.
Theaetetus
How so?
Stranger
Do you think that sameness of quality or nature or relations could ever come into existence without the state of rest?
Theaetetus
Not at all.
Stranger
What then?
Without these can you see how mind could exist or come into existence anywhere?
Theaetetus
By no means.
Stranger
And yet we certainly must contend by every argument against him who does away with knowledge or reason or mind and then makes any dogmatic assertion about anything.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
Then the philosopher, who pays the highest honor to these things, must necessarily, as it seems, because of them refuse to accept the theory of those who say the universe is at rest, whether as a unity or in many forms, and must also refuse utterly to listen to those who say that being is universal motion; he must quote the children's prayer, "all things immovable and in motion," and must say that being and the universe consist of both.
Theaetetus
Very true.
Stranger
Do we not, then, seem to have attained at last a pretty good definition of being?
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
But dear me, Theaetetus!
I think we are now going to discover the difficulty of the inquiry about being.
Theaetetus
What is this again, What do you mean?
Stranger
My dear fellow, don't you see that we are now densely ignorant about it, but think that we are saying something worth while?
Theaetetus
I think so, at any rate, and I do not at all understand what hidden error we have fallen into.
Stranger
Then watch more closely and see whether, if we make these admissions, we may not justly be asked the same questions we asked a while ago of those who said the universe was hot and cold.
Theaetetus
What questions?
Remind me.
Stranger
Certainly;
and I will try to do this by questioning you, as we questioned them at the time.
So that also we make some progress.
Theaetetus
That is right.
Stranger
Very well, then; you say that motion and rest are most directly opposed to each other, do you not?
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
And yet you say that both and each of them equally exist?
Theaetetus
Yes, I do.
Stranger
And in granting that they exist, do you mean to say that both and each are in motion?
Theaetetus
By no means.
Stranger
But do you mean that they are at rest, when you say that both exist?
Theaetetus
Of course not.
Stranger
Being, then, you consider to be something else in the soul, a third in addition to these two, inasmuch as you think rest and motion are embraced by it; and since you comprehend and observe that they participate in existence, you therefore said that they are.
Theaetetus
We really do seem to have a vague vision of being as some third thing, when we say that motion and rest are.
Stranger
Then being is not motion and rest in combination, but something else, different from them.
Theaetetus
Apparently.
Stranger
According to its own nature, then, being is neither at rest nor in motion.
Theaetetus
You are about right.
Stranger
What is there left, then, to which a man can still turn his mind who wishes to establish within himself any clear conception of being?
Theaetetus
What indeed?
Stranger
There is nothing left, I think, to which he can turn easily.
For if a thing is not in motion, it must surely be at rest;
and again, what is not at rest, must surely be in motion.
But now we find that being has emerged outside of both these classes.
Is that possible, then?
Theaetetus
No, nothing could be more impossible.
Stranger
Then there is this further thing which we ought to remember.
Theaetetus
What is it?
Stranger
That when we were asked to what the appellation of not-being should be applied, we were in the greatest perplexity.
Do you remember?
Theaetetus
Of course I do.
Stranger
Well, then, are we now in any less perplexity about being?
Theaetetus
It seems to me, stranger, that we are, if possible, in even greater.
Stranger
This point, then, let us put down definitely as one of complete perplexity.
But since being and not-being participate equally in the perplexity, there is now at last some hope that as either of them emerges more dimly or more clearly, so also will the other emerge.
If, however, we are able to see neither of them, we will at any rate push our discussion through between both of them at once as creditably as we can.
Theaetetus
Good.
Stranger
Let us, then, explain how we come to be constantly calling this same thing by many names.
Theaetetus
What, for instance?
Please give an example.
Stranger
We speak of man, you know, and give him many additional designations; we attribute to him colors and forms and sizes and vices and virtues, and in all these cases and countless others we say not only that he is man, but we say he is good and numberless other things.
So in the same way every single thing which we supposed to be one, we treat as many and call by many names.
Theaetetus
True.
Stranger
And it is in this way, I fancy, that we have provided a fine feast for youngsters and for old men whose learning has come to them late in life; for example, it is easy enough for anyone to grasp the notion that the many cannot possibly be one, nor the one many, and so, apparently, they take pleasure in saying that we must not call a man good, but must call the good good, and a man man.
I fancy, Theaetetus, you often run across people who take such matters seriously; sometimes they are elderly men whose poverty of intellect makes them admire such quibbles, and who think this is a perfect mine of wisdom they have discovered.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
Then, to include in our discussion all those who have ever engaged in any talk whatsoever about being, let us address our present arguments to these men as well as to all those with whom we were conversing before, and let us employ the form of questions.
Theaetetus
What are the arguments?
Stranger
Shall we attribute neither being to rest and motion, nor any attribute to anything, but shall we in our discussions assume that they do not mingle and cannot participate in one another?
Or shall we gather all things together, believing that they are capable of combining with one another?
Or are some capable of it and others not?
Which of these alternatives, Theaetetus, should we say is their choice?
Theaetetus
I cannot answer these questions for them.
Stranger
Then why did you not answer each separately and see what the result was in each case?
Theaetetus
A good suggestion.
Stranger
And let us, if you please, assume that they say first that nothing has any power to combine with anything else.
Then motion and rest will have no share in being, will they?
Theaetetus
No.
Stranger
Well, then, will either of them be, if it has no share in being?
Theaetetus
It will not.
Stranger
See how by this admission everything is overturned at once, as it seems the doctrine of those who advocate universal motion, that of the partisans of unity and rest, and that of the men who teach that all existing things are distributed into invariable and everlasting kinds.
For all of these make use of being as an attribute.
Some says that the universe "is" in motion, others that it "is" at rest.
Theaetetus
Exactly.
Stranger
And further, all who teach that things combine at one time and separate at another, whether infinite elements combine in unity and are derived from unity or finite elements separate and then unite, regardless of whether they say that these changes take place successively or without interruption, would be talking nonsense in all these doctrines, if there is no intermingling.
Theaetetus
Quite right.
Stranger
Then, too, the very men who forbid us to call anything by another name because it participates in the effect produced by another, would be made most especially ridiculous by this doctrine.
Theaetetus
How so?
Stranger
Because they are obliged in speaking of anything to use the expressions "to be," "apart," "from the rest," "by itself," and countless others; they are powerless to keep away from them or avoid working them into their discourse; and therefore there is no need of others to refute them, but, as the saying goes, their enemy and future opponent is of their own household whom they always carry about with them as they go, giving forth speech from within them, like the wonderful Eurycles.
Theaetetus
That is a remarkably accurate illustration
Stranger
But what if we ascribe to all things the power of participation in one another?
Theaetetus
Even I can dispose of that assumption.
Stranger
How?
Theaetetus
Because motion itself would be wholly at rest, and rest in turn would itself be in motion, if these two could be joined with one another.
Stranger
But surely this at least is most absolutely impossible, that motion be at rest and rest be in motion?
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
Then only the third possibility is left.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And certainly one of these three must be true; either all things will mingle with one another, or none will do so, or some will and others will not.
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
And certainly the first two were found to be impossible.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
Then everybody who wishes to answer correctly will adopt the remaining one of the three possibilities.
Theaetetus
Precisely.
Stranger
Now since some things will commingle and others will not, they are in much the same condition as the letters of the alphabet;
for some of these do not fit each other, and others do.
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
And the vowels, to a greater degree than the others, run through them all as a bond, so that without one of the vowels the other letters cannot be joined one to another.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
Now does everybody know which letters can join with which others?
Or does he who is to join them properly have need of art?
Theaetetus
He has need of art.
Stranger
What art?
Theaetetus
The art of grammar.
Stranger
And is not the same true in connection with high and low sounds?
Is not he who has the art to know the sounds which mingle and those which do not, musical, and he who does not know unmusical?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And we shall find similar conditions, then, in all the other arts and processes which are devoid of art?
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
Now since we have agreed that the classes or genera also commingle with one another, or do not commingle, in the same way, must not he possess some science and proceed by the processes of reason who is to show correctly which of the classes harmonize with which, and which reject one another,
and also if he is to show whether there are some elements extending through all and holding them together so that they can mingle, and again, when they separate, whether there are other universal causes of separation?
Theaetetus
Certainly he needs science, and perhaps even the greatest of sciences.
Stranger
Then, Theaetetus, what name shall we give to this science?
Or, by Zeus, have we unwittingly stumbled upon the science that belongs to free men and perhaps found the philosopher while we were looking for the sophist?
Theaetetus
What do you mean?
Stranger
Shall we not say that the division of things by classes and the avoidance of the belief that the same class is another, or another the same, belongs to the science of dialectic?
Theaetetus
Yes, we shall.
Stranger
Then he who is able to do this has a clear perception of one form or idea extending entirely through many individuals each of which lies apart, and of many forms differing from one another but included in one greater form, and again of one form evolved by the union of many wholes, and of many forms entirely apart and separate.
This is the knowledge and ability to distinguish by classes how individual things can or cannot be associated with one another.
Theaetetus
Certainly it is.
Stranger
But you surely, I suppose, will not grant the art of dialectic to any but the man who pursues philosophy in purity and righteousness.
Theaetetus
How could it be granted to anyone else?
Stranger
Then it is in some region like this that we shall always, both now and hereafter, discover the philosopher, if we look for him; he also is hard to see clearly, but the difficulty is not the same in his case and that of the sophist.
Theaetetus
How do they differ?
Stranger
The sophist runs away into the darkness of not-being, feeling his way in it by practice, and is hard to discern on account of the darkness of the place.
Don't you think so?
Theaetetus
It seems likely.
Stranger
But the philosopher, always devoting himself through reason to the idea of being, is also very difficult to see on account of the brilliant light of the place; for the eyes of the soul of the multitude are not strong enough to endure the sight of the divine.
Theaetetus
This also seems no less true than what you said about the sophist.
Stranger
Now we will make more accurate investigations about the philosopher hereafter, if we still care to do so; but as to the sophist, it is clear that we must not relax our efforts until we have a satisfactory view of him.
Theaetetus
You are right.
Stranger
Since, therefore, we are agreed that some of the classes will mingle with one another, and others will not, and some will mingle with few and others with many, and that there is nothing to hinder some from mingling universally with all,
let us next proceed with our discussion by investigating, not all the forms or ideas, lest we become confused among so many, but some only, selecting them from those that are considered the most important; let us first consider their several natures, then what their power of mingling with one another is, and so, if we cannot grasp being and not-being with perfect clearness, we shall at any rate not fail to reason fully about them, so far as the method of our present inquiry permits.
Let us in this way see whether it is, after all, permitted us to say that not-being really is, although not being, and yet come off unscathed.
Theaetetus
Yes; that is the proper thing for us to do.
Stranger
The most important, surely, of the classes or genera are those which we just mentioned; being itself and rest and motion.
Theaetetus
Yes, by far.
Stranger
And further, two of them, we say, cannot mingle with each other.
Theaetetus
Decidedly not.
Stranger
But being can mingle with both of them, for they both are.
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
Then these prove to be three.
Theaetetus
To be sure.
Stranger
Each of them is, then, other than the remaining two, but the same as itself.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
But what do we mean by these words, "the same" and "other," which we have just used?
Are they two new classes, different from the other three, but always of necessity mingled with them, and must we conduct our inquiry on the assumption that there are five classes, not three, or are we unconsciously speaking of one of those three when we say "the same" or "other"?
Theaetetus
Perhaps.
Stranger
But certainly motion and rest are neither other nor the same.
Theaetetus
How so?
Stranger
Whatever term we apply to rest and motion in common cannot be either of those two.
Theaetetus
Why not?
Stranger
Because motion would be at rest and rest would be in motion; in respect of both, for whichever of the two became "other" would force the other to change its nature into that of its opposite, since it would participate in its opposite.
Theaetetus
Exactly so.
Stranger
Both certainly partake of the same and the other.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
Then we must not say that motion, or rest either, is the same or other.
Theaetetus
No.
Stranger
But should we conceive of "being" and "the same" as one?
Theaetetus
Perhaps.
Stranger
But if "being" and "the same" have no difference of meaning, then when we go on and say that both rest and motion are, we shall be saying that they are both the same, since they are.
Theaetetus
But surely that is impossible.
Stranger
Then it is impossible for being and the same to be one.
Theaetetus
Pretty nearly.
Stranger
So we shall consider "the same" a fourth class in addition to the other three?
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
Then shall we call "the other" a fifth class?
Or must we conceive of this and "being" as two names for one class?
Theaetetus
May be.
Stranger
But I fancy you admit that among the entities some are always conceived as absolute, and some as relative.
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
And other is always relative to other, is it not?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
It would not be so, if being and the other were not utterly different.
If the other, like being, partook of both absolute and relative existence, there would be also among the others that exist another not in relation to any other; but as it is, we find that whatever is other is just what it is through compulsion of some other.
Theaetetus
The facts are as you say.
Stranger
Then we must place the nature of "the other" as a fifth among the classes in which we select our examples.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And we shall say that it permeates them all; for each of them is other than the rest, not by reason of its own nature, but because it partakes of the idea of the other.
Theaetetus
Exactly.
Stranger
Let us now state our conclusions, taking up the five classes one at a time.
Theaetetus
How?
Stranger
Take motion first; we say that it is entirely other than rest, do we not?
Theaetetus
We do.
Stranger
Then it is not rest.
Theaetetus
Not at all.
Stranger
But it exists, by reason of its participation in being.
Theaetetus
Yes, it exists.
Stranger
Now motion again is other than the same.
Theaetetus
You're about right.
Stranger
Therefore it is not the same.
Theaetetus
No, it is not.
Stranger
But yet we found it was the same, because all things partake of the same.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
Then we must admit that motion is the same and is not the same, and we must not be disturbed thereby; for when we say it is the same and not the same, we do not use the words alike.
When we call it the same, we do so because it partakes of the same in relation to itself, and when we call it not the same, we do so on account of its participation in the other, by which it is separated from the same and becomes not that but other, so that it is correctly spoken of in turn as not the same.
Theaetetus
Yes, certainly.
Stranger
Then even if absolute motion partook in any way of rest, it would not be absurd to say it was at rest?
Theaetetus
It would be perfectly right, if we are to admit that some of the classes will mingle with one another, and others will not.
Stranger
And surely we demonstrated that before we took up our present points; we proved that it was according to nature.
Theaetetus
Yes, of course.
Stranger
Then let us recapitulate: Motion is other than the other, just as we found it to be other than the same and than rest.
Theaetetus
Inevitably.
Stranger
Then it is in a sense not other and also other, according to our present reasoning.
Theaetetus
True.
Stranger
Now how about the next point?
Shall we say next that motion is other than the three, but not other than the fourth, that is, if we have agreed that the classes about which and within which we undertook to carry on our inquiry are five in number?
Theaetetus
How can we say that?
For we cannot admit that the number is less than was shown just now.
Stranger
Then we may fearlessly persist in contending that motion is other than being?
Theaetetus
Yes, most fearlessly.
Stranger
It is clear, then, that motion really is not, and also that it is, since it partakes of being?
Theaetetus
That is perfectly clear.
Stranger
That is inevitable.
And this extends to all the classes; for in all of them the nature of other so operates as to make each one other than being, and therefore not-being.
So we may, from this point of view, rightly say of all of them alike that they are not;
and again, since they partake of being, that they are and have being.
Theaetetus
Yes, I suppose so.
Stranger
And so, in relation to each of the classes, being is many, and not-being is infinite in number.
Theaetetus
So it seems.
Stranger
Then being itself must also be said to be other than all other things.
Theaetetus
Yes, it must.
Stranger
And we conclude that whatever the number of other things is, just that is the number of the things in relation to which being is not; for not being those things, it is itself one, and again, those other things are not unlimited in number.
Theaetetus
That is not far from the truth.
Stranger
Then we must not be disturbed by this either, since by their nature the classes have participation in one another.
But if anyone refuses to accept our present results, let him reckon with our previous arguments and then proceed to reckon with the next step.
Theaetetus
That is very fair.
Stranger
Then here is a point to consider.
Theaetetus
What is it?
Stranger
When we say not-being, we speak, I think, not of something that is the opposite of being, but only of something different.
Theaetetus
What do you mean?
Stranger
For instance, when we speak of a thing as not great, do we seem to you to mean by the expression what is small any more than what is of middle size?
Theaetetus
No, of course not.
Stranger
Then when we are told that the negative signifies the opposite, we shall not admit it; we shall admit only that the particle "not" indicates something different from the words to which it is prefixed, or rather from the things denoted by the words that follow the negative.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
Let us consider another point and see if you agree with me.
Theaetetus
What is it?
Stranger
It seems to me that the nature of the other is all cut up into little bits, like knowledge.
Theaetetus
What do you mean?
Stranger
Knowledge, like other, is one, but each separate part of it which applies to some particular subject has a name of its own; hence there are many arts, as they are called, and kinds of knowledge, or sciences.
Theaetetus
Yes, certainly.
Stranger
And the same is true, by their nature, of the parts of the other, though it also is one concept.
Theaetetus
Perhaps; but let us discuss the matter and see how it comes about.
Stranger
Is there a part of the other which is opposed to the beautiful?
Theaetetus
There is.
Stranger
Shall we say that this is nameless or that it has a name?
Theaetetus
That it has one; for that which in each case we call not-beautiful is surely the other of the nature of the beautiful and of nothing else.
Stranger
Now, then, tell me something more.
Theaetetus
What?
Stranger
Does it not result from this that the not-beautiful is a distinct part of some one class of being and also, again, opposed to some class of being?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
Then, apparently, it follows that the not-beautiful is a contrast of being with being.
Theaetetus
Quite right.
Stranger
Can we, then, in that case, say that the beautiful is more and the not-beautiful less a part of being?
Theaetetus
Not at all.
Stranger
Hence the not-great must be said to be no less truly than the great?
Theaetetus
No less truly.
Stranger
And so we must recognize the same relation between the just and the not-just, in so far as neither has any more being than the other?
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
And we shall, then, say the same of other things, since the nature of the other is proved to possess real being; and if it has being, we must necessarily ascribe being in no less degree to its parts also.
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
Then, as it seems, the opposition of the nature of a part of the other, and of the nature of being, when they are opposed to one another, is no less truly existence than is being itself, if it is not wrong for me to say so, for it signifies not the opposite of being, but only the other of being, and nothing more.
Theaetetus
That is perfectly clear.
Stranger
Then what shall we call this?
Theaetetus
Evidently this is precisely not-being, which we were looking for because of the sophist.
Stranger
And is this, as you were saying, as fully endowed with being as anything else, and shall we henceforth say with confidence that not-being has an assured existence and a nature of its own?
Just as we found that the great was great and the beautiful was beautiful, the not-great was not-great and the not-beautiful was not-beautiful, shall we in the same way say that not-being was and is not-being, to be counted as one class among the many classes of being?
Or have we, Theaetetus, any remaining distrust about the matter?
Theaetetus
None whatever.
Stranger
Do you observe, then, that we have gone farther in our distrust of Parmenides than the limit set by his prohibition?
Theaetetus
What do you mean?
Stranger
We have proceeded farther in our investigation and have shown him more than that which he forbade us to examine.
Theaetetus
How so?
Stranger
Because he says somewhere:"Never shall this thought prevail, that not-being is;
Nay, keep your mind from this path of investigation,"
Theaetetus
Yes, that is what he says.
Stranger
But we have not only pointed out that things which are not exist, but we have even shown what the form or class of not-being is; for we have pointed out that the nature of the other exists and is distributed in small bits throughout all existing things in their relations to one another, and we have ventured to say that each part of the other which is contrasted with being, really is exactly not-being.
Theaetetus
And certainly, Stranger, I think that what we have said is perfectly true.
Stranger
Then let not anyone assert that we declare that not-being is the opposite of being, and hence are so rash as to say that not-being exists.
For we long ago gave up speaking of any opposite of being, whether it exists or not and is capable or totally incapable of definition.
But as for our present definition of not-being, a man must either refute us and show that we are wrong, or, so long as he cannot do that, he too must say, as we do, that the classes mingle with one another,
and being and the other permeate all things, including each other, and the other, since it participates in being, is, by reason of this participation, yet is not that in which it participates, but other, and since it is other than being, must inevitably be not-being.
But being, in turn, participates in the other and is therefore other than the rest of the classes, and since it is other than all of them, it is not each one of them or all the rest, but only itself;
there is therefore no doubt that there are thousands and thousands of things which being is not, and just so all other things, both individually and collectively, in many relations are, and in many are not.
Theaetetus
True.
Stranger
And if any man has doubts about these oppositions, he must make investigations and advance better doctrines than these of ours; or if he finds pleasure in dragging words about and applying them to different things at different times, with the notion that he has invented something difficult to explain, our present argument asserts that he has taken up seriously matters which are not worth serious attention;
for this process is neither clever nor difficult, whereas here now is something both difficult and beautiful.
Theaetetus
What is it?
Stranger
What I have spoken of before the ability to let those quibbles go as of no account and to follow and refute in detail the arguments of a man who says that other is in a sense the same, or that the same is other, and to do this from that point of view and with regard for those relations which he presupposes for either of these conditions.
But to show that in some sort of fashion the same is the other, and the other the same, and the great small, and the like unlike, and to take pleasure in thus always bringing forward opposites in the argument, all that is no true refutation, but is plainly the newborn offspring of some brain that has just begun to lay hold upon the problem of realities.
Theaetetus
Exactly so.
Stranger
For certainly, my friend, the attempt to separate everything from everything else is not only not in good taste but also shows that a man is utterly uncultivated and unphilosophical.
Theaetetus
Why so?
Stranger
The complete separation of each thing from all is the utterly final obliteration of all discourse.
For our power of discourse is derived from the interweaving of the classes or ideas with one another.
Theaetetus
True.
Stranger
Observe, then, that we have now been just in time in carrying our point against the supporters of such doctrine, and in forcing them to admit that one thing mingles with another.
Theaetetus
What was our object?
Stranger
Our object was to establish discourse as one of our classes of being.
For if we were deprived of this, we should be deprived of philosophy, which would be the greatest calamity; moreover, we must at the present moment come to an agreement about the nature of discourse, and if we were robbed of it by its absolute non-existence, we could no longer discourse;
and we should be robbed of it if we agreed that there is no mixture of anything with anything.
Theaetetus
That is true enough; but I do not understand why we must come to an agreement about discourse just now.
Stranger
Perhaps the easiest way for you to understand is by following this line of argument.
Theaetetus
What line?
Stranger
We found that not-being was one of the classes of being, permeating all being.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
So the next thing is to inquire whether it mingles with opinion and speech.
Theaetetus
Why?
Stranger
If it does not mingle with them, the necessary result is that all things are true, but if it does, then false opinion and false discourse come into being; for to think or say what is not that is, I suppose, falsehood arising in mind or in words.
Theaetetus
So it is.
Stranger
But if falsehood exists, deceit exists.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And if deceit exists, all things must be henceforth full of images and likenesses and fancies.
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
But we said that the sophist had taken refuge in this region and had absolutely denied the existence of falsehood: for he said that not-being could be neither conceived nor uttered, since not-being did not in any way participate in being.
Theaetetus
Yes, so it was.
Stranger
But now not-being has been found to partake of being, and so, perhaps, he would no longer keep up the fight in this direction;
but he might say that some ideas partake of not-being and some do not, and that speech and opinion are among those which do not; and he would therefore again contend that the image-making and fantastic art, in which we placed him, has absolutely no existence, since opinion and speech have no participation in not-being; for falsehood cannot possibly exist unless such participation takes place.
For this reason we must first inquire into the nature of speech and opinion and fancy, in order that when they are made clear we may perceive that they participate in not-being, and when we have perceived that, may prove the existence of falsehood, and after proving that, may imprison the sophist therein, if he can be held on that charge, and if not, may set him free and seek him in another class.
Theaetetus
It certainly seems, Stranger, that what you said at first about the sophist that he was a hard kind of creature to catch is true;
for he seems to have no end of defences, and when he throws one of them up, his opponent has first to fight through it before he can reach the man himself;
for now, you see, we have barely passed through the non-existence of being, which was his first prepared line of defence, when we find another line ready; and so we must prove that falsehood exists in relation to opinion and to speech; and after this, perhaps, there will be another line, and still another after that; and it seems no end will ever appear.
Stranger
No one should be discouraged, Theaetetus, who can make constant progress, even though it be slow.
For if a man is discouraged under these conditions, what would he do under others if he did not get ahead at all or were even pressed back?
It would be a long time, as the saying is, before such a man would ever take a city.
But now, my friend, since we have passed the line you speak of, the main defences would surely be in our hands, and the rest will now be smaller and easier to take.
Theaetetus
Good.
Stranger
First, then, let us take up speech and opinion, as I said just now, in order to come to a clearer understanding whether not-being touches them, or they are both entirely true, and neither is ever false.
Theaetetus
Very well.
Stranger
Then let us now investigate names, just a we spoke a while ago about ideas and letters;
for in that direction the object of our present search is coming in sight.
Theaetetus
What do we need to understand about names?
Stranger
Whether they all unite with one another, or none of them, or some will and some will not.
Theaetetus
Evidently the last; some will and some will not.
Stranger
This, perhaps, is what you mean, that those which are spoken in order and mean something do unite, but those that mean nothing in their sequence do not unite.
Theaetetus
How so, and what do you mean by that?
Stranger
What I supposed you had in mind when you assented;
for we have two kinds of vocal indications of being.
Theaetetus
How so?
Stranger
One called nouns, the other verbs.
Theaetetus
Define each of them.
Stranger
The indication which relates to action we may call a verb.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And the vocal sign applied to those who perform the actions in question we call a noun.
Theaetetus
Exactly.
Stranger
Hence discourse is never composed of nouns alone spoken in succession, nor of verbs spoken without nouns.
Theaetetus
I do not understand that.
Stranger
I see; you evidently had something else in mind when you assented just now; for what I wished to say was just this, that verbs and nouns do not make discourse if spoken successively in this way.
Theaetetus
In what way?
Stranger
For instance, "walks," "runs," "sleeps" and the other verbs which denote actions, even if you utter all there are of them in succession, do not make discourse for all that.
Theaetetus
No, of course not.
Stranger
And again, when "lion," "stag," "horse," and all other names of those who perform these actions are uttered, such a succession of words does not yet make discourse;
for in neither case do the words uttered indicate action or inaction or existence of anything that exists or does not exist, until the verbs are mingled with the nouns;
then the words fit, and their first combination is a sentence, about the first and shortest form of discourse.
Theaetetus
What do you mean by that?
Stranger
When one says "a man learns," you agree that this is the least and first of sentences, do you not?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
For when he says that, he makes a statement about that which is or is becoming or has become or is to be; he does not merely give names, but he reaches a conclusion by combining verbs with nouns.
That is why we said that he discourses and does not merely give names, and therefore we gave to this combination the name of discourse.
Theaetetus
That was right.
Stranger
So, then, just as of things some fit each other and some do not, so too some vocal signs do not fit, but some of them do fit and form discourse.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
Now there is another little point.
Theaetetus
What is it?
Stranger
A sentence, if it is to be a sentence, must have a subject; without a subject it is impossible.
Theaetetus
True.
Stranger
And it must also be of some quality, must it not?
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
Now let us pay attention to each other.
Theaetetus
Yes, at any rate we ought to do so.
Stranger
Now, then, I will speak a sentence to you in which a action and the result of action are combined by means of a noun and a verb, and whatever the subject of the sentence is do you tell me.
Theaetetus
I will, to the best of my ability.
Stranger
"Theaetetus sits."
It isn't a long sentence, is it?
Theaetetus
No, it is fairly short.
Stranger
Now it is for you to say what it is about and what its subject is.
Theaetetus
Clearly it is about me, and I am its subject.
Stranger
And how about this sentence?
Theaetetus
What one?
Stranger
"Theaetetus, with whom I am now talking, flies."
Theaetetus
Every one would agree that this also is about me and I am its subject.
Stranger
But we agree that every sentence must have some quality.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
Now what quality shall be ascribed to each of these sentences?
Theaetetus
One is false, I suppose, the other true.
Stranger
The true one states facts as they are about you.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
And the false one states things that are other than the facts.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
In other words, it speaks of things that are not as if they were.
Theaetetus
Yes, that is pretty much what it does.
Stranger
And states with reference to you that things are which are other than things which actually are;
for we said, you know, that in respect to everything there are many things that are and many that are not.
Theaetetus
To be sure.
Stranger
Now the second of my sentences about you is in the first place by sheer necessity one of the shortest which conform to our definition of sentence.
Theaetetus
At any rate we just now agreed on that point.
Stranger
And secondly it has a subject.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And if you are not the subject, there is none.
Theaetetus
Certainly not.
Stranger
And if there is no subject, it would not be a sentence at all; for we showed that a sentence without a subject is impossible.
Theaetetus
Quite right.
Stranger
Now when things are said about you, but things other are said as the same and things that are not as things that are, it appears that when such a combination is formed of verbs and nouns we have really and truly false discourse.
Theaetetus
Yes, very truly.
Stranger
Is it, then, not already plain that the three classes, thought, opinion, and fancy, all arise in our minds as both false and true?
Theaetetus
How is it plain?
Stranger
You will understand more easily if you first grap their natures and the several differences between them.
Theaetetus
Give me an opportunity.
Stranger
Well, then, thought and speech are the same; only the former, which is a silent inner conversation of the soul with itself, has been given the special name of thought, Is not that true?
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
But the stream that flows from the soul in vocal utterance through the mouth has the name of speech?
Theaetetus
True.
Stranger
And in speech we know there is just
Theaetetus
What?
Stranger
Affirmation and negation
Theaetetus
Yes, we know that.
Stranger
Now when this arises in the soul silently by way of thought, can you give it any other name than opinion?
Theaetetus
Certainly not.
Stranger
And when such a condition is brought about in anyone, not independently, but through sensation, can it properly be called anything but seeming, or fancy?
Theaetetus
No.
Stranger
Then since speech, as we found, is true and false, and we saw that thought is conversation of the soul with itself, and opinion is the final result of thought, and what we mean when we say "it seems" is a mixture of sensation and opinion, it is inevitable that, since these are all akin to speech, some of them must sometimes be false.
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
Do you see, then, that false opinion and false discourse were found sooner than we expected when we feared a few moments ago that in looking for them we were undertaking an endless task?
Theaetetus
Yes, I see.
Stranger
Then let us not be discouraged about the rest of our search, either;
for now that these points are settled, we have only to revert to our previous divisions into classes.
Theaetetus
What divisions?
Stranger
We made two classes of image-making, the likeness-making and the fantastic.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And we said that we did not know to which of the two the sophist should be assigned.
Theaetetus
You are right.
Stranger
And in the midst of our perplexity about that, we were overwhelmed by a still greater dizziness when the doctrine appeared which challenges everybody and asserts that neither likeness nor image nor appearance exists at all, because falsehood never exists anywhere in any way.
Theaetetus
True.
Stranger
But now, since the existence of false speech and false opinion has been proved, it is possible for imitations of realities to exist and for an art of deception to arise from this condition of mind.
Theaetetus
Yes, it is possible.
Stranger
And we decided some time ago that the sophist was in one of those two divisions of the image-making class.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
Then let us try again; let us divide in two the class we have taken up for discussion, and proceed always by way of the right-hand part of the thing divided, clinging close to the company to which the sophist belongs, until, having stripped him of all common properties and left him only his own peculiar nature, we shall show him plainly first to ourselves and secondly to those who are most closely akin to the dialectic method.
Theaetetus
Right.
Stranger
We began by making two divisions of art, the productive and the acquisitive, did we not?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And the sophist showed himself to us in the arts of hunting, contests, commerce, and the like, which were subdivisions of acquisitive art?
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
But now, since imitative art has taken him over, it is clear that our first step must be the division of productive art into two parts;
for imitative art is a kind of production of images, however, we say, not of real things in each case.
Do you agree?
Theaetetus
By all means.
Stranger
Then let us first assume two parts of productive art.
Theaetetus
What are they?
Stranger
The divine and the human.
Theaetetus
I don't yet understand.
Stranger
We said, if we remember the beginning of our conversation, that every power is productive which causes things to come into being which did not exist before.
Theaetetus
Yes, we remember.
Stranger
There are all the animals, and all the plants that grow out of the earth from seeds and roots, and all the lifeless substances, fusible and infusible, that are formed within the earth.
Shall we say that they came into being, not having been before, in any other way than through God's workmanship?
Or, accepting the commonly expressed belief
Theaetetus
What belief?
Stranger
That nature brings them forth from some self-acting cause, without creative intelligence.
Or shall we say that they are created by reason and by divine knowledge that comes from God?
Theaetetus
I, perhaps because I am young, often change from one opinion to the other; but now, looking at you and considering that you think they are created by God, I also adopt that view.
Stranger
Well said, Theaetetus;
and if I thought you were one of those who would think differently by and by, I should try now, by argument and urgent persuasion, to make you agree with my opinion; but since I understand your nature and see that it of itself inclines, without any words of mine, towards that to which you say you are at present attracted, I will let that go; for it would be a waste of time.
But I will assume that things which people call natural are made by divine art, and things put together by man out of those as materials are made by human art, and that there are accordingly two kinds of art, the one human and the other divine.
Theaetetus
Quite right.
Stranger
Now that there are two, divide each of them again.
Theaetetus
How?
Stranger
You divided all productive art widthwise, as it were, before; now divide it lengthwise.
Theaetetus
Assume that it is done.
Stranger
In that way we now get four parts in all; two belong to us and are human, and two belong to the gods and are divine.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And again, when the section is made the other way, one part of each half has to do with the making of real things, and the two remaining parts may very well be called image-making; and so productive art is again divided into two parts.
Theaetetus
Tell me again how each part is distinguished.
Stranger
We know that we and all the other animals, and fire, water, and their kindred elements, out of which natural objects are formed, are one and all the very offspring and creations of God, do we not?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
And corresponding to each and all of these there are images, not the things themselves, which are also made by superhuman skill.
Theaetetus
What are they?
Stranger
The appearances in dreams, and those that arise by day and are said to be spontaneous a shadow when a dark object interrupts the firelight, or when twofold light, from the objects themselves and from outside, meets on smooth and bright surfaces and causes upon our senses an effect the reverse of our ordinary sight, thus producing an image.
Theaetetus
Yes, these are two works of divine creation, the thing itself and the corresponding image in each case.
Stranger
And how about our own art?
Shall we not say that we make a house by the art of building, and by the art of painting make another house, a sort of man-made dream produced for those who are awake?
Theaetetus
Certainly.
Stranger
And in the same way, we say, all the other works of our creative activity also are twofold and go in pairs the thing itself, produced by the art that creates real things, and the image, produced by the image-making art.
Theaetetus
I understand better now; and I agree that there are two kinds of production, each of them twofold the divine and the human by one method of bisection, and by the other real things and the product that consists of a sort of likenesses.
Stranger
We must remember that there were to be two parts of the image-making class, the likeness-making and the fantastic, if we should find that falsehood really existed and was in the class of real being.
Theaetetus
Yes, there were.
Stranger
But we found that falsehood does exist, and therefore we shall now, without any doubts, number the kinds of image-making art as two, shall we not?
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
Let us, then, again bisect the fantastic art.
Theaetetus
How?
Stranger
One kind is that produced by instruments, the other that in which the producer of the appearance offers himself as the instrument.
Theaetetus
What do you mean?
Stranger
When anyone, by employing his own person as his instrument, makes his own figure or voice seem similar to yours, that kind of fantastic art is called mimetic.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
Let us, then, classify this part under the name of mimetic art; but as for all the rest, let us be so self-indulgent as to let it go and leave it for someone else to unify and name appropriately.
Theaetetus
Very well, let us adopt that classification and let the other part go.
Stranger
But it is surely worth while to consider, Theaetetus, that the mimetic art also has two parts; and I will tell you why.
Theaetetus
Tell.
Stranger
Some who imitate do so with knowledge of that which they imitate, and others without such knowledge.
And yet what division can we imagine more complete than that which separates knowledge and ignorance?
Theaetetus
None.
Stranger
The example I just gave was of imitation by those who know, was it not?
For a man who imitates you would know you and your figure.
Theaetetus
Of course.
Stranger
But what of the figure of justice and, in a word, of virtue in general?
Are there not many who have no knowledge of it, but only a sort of opinion, and who try with the greatest eagerness to make this which they themselves think is virtue seem to exist within them, by imitating it in acts and words to the best of their ability?
Theaetetus
Yes, there are very many such people.
Stranger
Do all of them, then, fail in the attempt to seem to be just when they are not so at all?
Or is quite the opposite the case?
Theaetetus
All.
Stranger
Then I think we must say that such an imitator is quite distinct from the other, the one who does not know from the one who knows.
Theaetetus
Yes.
Stranger
Where, then, can the fitting name for each of the two be found?
Clearly it is not an easy task, because there was, it seems, among the earlier thinkers a long established and careless indolence in respect to the division of classes or genera into forms or species, so that nobody even tried to make such divisions; therefore there cannot be a great abundance of names.
However, even though the innovation in language be a trifle bold, let us, for the sake of making a distinction, call the imitation which is based on opinion, oplnion-imitation, and that which is founded on knowledge, a sort of scientific imitation.
Theaetetus
Agreed.
Stranger
We mat therefore apply ourselves to the former, for we found that the sophist was among those who imitate but was not among those who know.
Theaetetus
Very true.
Stranger
Then let us examine the opinion-imitator as if he were a piece of iron, and see whether he is sound or there is still some seam in him.
Theaetetus
Let us do so.
Stranger
Well, there is a very marked seam.
For some of these imitators are simple-minded and think they know that about which they have only opinion, but the other kind because of their experience in the rough and tumble of arguments, strongly suspect and fear that they are ignorant of the things which they pretend before the public to know.
Theaetetus
Certainly the two classes you mention both exist.
Stranger
Then shall we call one the simple imitator and the other the dissembling imitator?
Theaetetus
That is reaonable, at any rate.
Stranger
And shall we say that the latter forms one class or two again?
Theaetetus
That is your affair.
Stranger
I am considering, and I think I can see two classes I see one who can dissemble in long speeches in public before a multitude, and the other who does it in private in short speeches and forces the person who converses with him to contradict himself.
Theaetetus
You are quite right.
Stranger
And what name shall we give to him who makes the longer speeches?
Statesman or popular orator?
Theaetetus
Popular orator.
Stranger
And what shall we call the other?
Philosopher or sophist?
Theaetetus
We cannot very well call him philosopher, since by our hypothesis he is ignorant; but since he is all imitator of the philosopher, he will evidently have a name derived from his, and I think I am sure at last that we must truly call him the absolutely real and actual sophist.
Stranger
Shall we then bind up his name as we did before, winding it up from the end to the beginning?
Theaetetus
By all means.
Stranger
The imitative kind of the dissembling part of the art of opinion which is part of the art of contradiction and belongs to the fantastic class of the image-making art, and is not divine, but human, and has been defined in arguments as the juggling part of productive activity he who says that the true sophist is of this descent and blood will, in my opinion, speak the exact truth.
Theaetetus
Yes, he certainly will.
Statesman
Socrates
Theodorus
The Stranger
The Younger Socrates
Socrates
Really I am greatly indebted to you, Theodorus, for my acquaintance with Theaetetus and with the Stranger, too.
Theodorus
Presently, Socrates, you will be three times as much indebted, when they have worked out the statesman and the philosopher for you.
Socrates
Indeed!
My dear Theodorus, can I believe my ears, Were those really the words of the great calculator and geometrician?
Theodorus
Why, what do you mean, Socrates?
Socrates
When you rated sophist, statesman, and philosopher at the same value, though they are farther apart in worth than your mathematical proportion can express.
Theodorus
By Ammon, our special divinity, that is a good hit, Socrates; evidently you haven't forgotten your mathematics, and you are quite right in, finding fault with my bad arithmetic.
I will get even with you at some other time;
but now, Stranger, do not grow tired of being kind to us, but go on and tell us about the statesman or the philosopher, whichever you prefer to take first.
Stranger
That is the thing to do, Theodorus, since we have once begun, and we must not stop until we have finished with them.
But what shall I do about Theaetetus here?
Theodorus
In what respect?
Stranger
Shall we give him a rest and take his schoolmate here, the young Socrates, in his place?
What is your advice?
Theodorus
Make the change as you suggest.
They are young, and if they have a chance to rest by turns, they will bear any labor better.
Socrates
And besides, Stranger, it seems to me that they are both related to me after a fashion;
one of them anyhow, as you say, looks like me in his cast of countenance, and the other has the same name and appellation, which implies some sort of kinship.
Of course we ought always to be eager to get acquainted with our relatives by debating with them.
Now I myself had an argument with Theaetetus yesterday and have been listening to his answers just now, but I do not know Socrates in either way and must examine him, too.
But let him reply to you now; my turn will come by and by.
Stranger
Very well;
Socrates, do you hear what Socrates says?
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
And do you agree?
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
There seems to be no objection on your part, and I suppose there should be still less on mine.
Well, then, after the sophist, I think it is our next duty to seek for the statesman; so please tell me: should we rank him also among those who have a science, or not?
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
Must the sciences, then, be divided as when we were examining the sophist?
Younger Socrates
Perhaps.
Stranger
In that case, Socrates, I think the division will not be along the same lines.
Younger Socrates
How will it be?
Stranger
Along other lines.
Younger Socrates
Very likely.
Stranger
Where, then, shall we find the statesman's path?
For we must find it, separate it from the rest, and imprint upon it the seal of a single class; then we must set the mark of another single class upon all the other paths that lead away from this, and make our soul conceive of all sciences as of two classes.
Younger Socrates
This, Stranger, is now your affair, I think, not mine.
Stranger
And yet, Socrates, it must be your affair, too, when we have found the path.
Younger Socrates
Quite true.
Stranger
Are not arithmetic and certain other kindred arts pure sciences, without regard to practical application, which merely furnish knowledge?
Younger Socrates
Yes, they are.
Stranger
But the science possessed by the arts relating to carpentering and to handicraft in general is inherent in their application, and with its aid they create objects which did not previously exist.
Younger Socrates
To be sure.
Stranger
In this way, then, divide all science into two arts, calling the one practical, and the other purely intellectual.
Younger Socrates
Let us assume that all science is one and that these are its two forms.
Stranger
Shall we then assume that the statesman, king, master, and householder too, for that matter, are all one, to be grouped under one title, or shall we say that there are as many arts as names?
But let me rather help you to understand in this way.
Younger Socrates
In what way?
Stranger
By this example:
If anyone, though himself in private station, is able to advise one of the public physicians, must not his art be called by the same name as that of the man whom he advises?
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
Well, then, if a man who is himself in private station is wise enough to advise him who is king of a country, shall we not say that he has the science which the ruler himself ought to possess?
Younger Socrates
We shall.
Stranger
But certainly the science of a true king is kingly science?
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
And will not he who possesses this science, whether he happen to be a ruler or a private citizen, rightly be called "kingly," when considered purely with reference to his art?
Younger Socrates
At least he has a right to be.
Stranger
And surely the householder and the master of a family are the same.
Younger Socrates
Yes, of course.
Stranger
Well, so far as government is concerned, is there any difference between the grandeur of a large house and the majesty of a small state?
Younger Socrates
No.
Stranger
Then as for the point we were just discussing, it is clear that all these are the objects of one science, and whether a man calls this the art of kingship or statesmanship or householding, let us not quarrel with him.
Younger Socrates
By no means.
Stranger
But this is plain, that any king can do little with his hands or his whole body toward holding his position, compared with what he can do with the sagacity and strength of his soul.
Younger Socrates
Yes, that is plain.
Stranger
Shall we say, then, that the king is more akin to the intellectual than to the manual or the practical in general?
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
Shall we, therefore, put all these together as one the political art and the statesman, the royal art and the king?
Younger Socrates
Obviously.
Stranger
Then we should be proceeding in due order if we should next divide intellectual science?
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
Now pay attention to see if we can perceive any natural line of cleavage in it.
Younger Socrates
Tell us of what sort it is.
Stranger
Of this sort.
We recognized a sort of art of calculation.
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
It is, I suppose, most certainly one of the intellectual arts.
Younger Socrates
Of course.
Stranger
And shall we grant to the art of calculation, when it has found out the difference between numbers, any further function than that of passing judgement on them when found out?
Younger Socrates
No, certainly not.
Stranger
Every architect, too, is a ruler of workmen, not a workman himself.
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
As supplying knowledge, not manual labor.
Younger Socrates
True.
Stranger
So he may fairly be said to participate in intellectual science.
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
But it is his business, I suppose, not to pass judgement and be done with it and go away, as the calculator did, but to give each of the workmen the proper orders, until they have finished their appointed task.
Younger Socrates
You are right.
Stranger
Then all such sciences, and all those that are in the class with calculating, are alike intellectual sciences, but these two classes differ from one another in the matter of judging and commanding.
Younger Socrates
I think so.
Stranger
Then if we bisected intellectual science as a whole and called one part the commanding and the other the judging part, might we say we had made fitting division?
Younger Socrates
Yes, in my opinion.
Stranger
And surely when men are doing anything in common it is pleasant for them to agree.
Younger Socrates
Of course it is.
Stranger
On this point, then, so long as we ourselves are in agreement, we need not bother about the opinions of others.
Younger Socrates
Of course not.
Stranger
Now to which of these two classes is the kingly man to be assigned?
Shall we assign him to the art of judging, as a kind of spectator, or rather to the art of commanding, inasmuch as he is a ruler?
Younger Socrates
Rather to the latter, of course.
Stranger
Then once more we must see whether the art of command falls into two divisions.
It seems to me that it does, and I think there is much the same distinction between the kingly class and the class of heralds as between the art of men who sell what they themselves produce and that of retail dealers.
Younger Socrates
How so?
Stranger
Retail dealers receive and sell over again the productions of others, which have generally been sold before.
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
And in like manner heralds receive the purposes of others in the form of orders, and then give the orders a second time to others.
Younger Socrates
Very true.
Stranger
Shall we, then, join the art of the king in the same class with the art of the interpreter, the boatswain, the prophet, the herald, and many other kindred arts, all of which involve giving orders?
Or, as we just now made a comparison of functions, shall we now by comparison make a name also since the class of those who issue orders of their own is virtually nameless and assign kings to the science of giving orders of one's own, disregarding all the rest and leaving to someone else the task of naming them?
For the object of our present quest is the ruler, not his opposite.
Younger Socrates
Quite right.
Stranger
Then since a reasonable distinction between this class and the rest has been made, by distinguishing the commands given as one's own or another's, shall we again divide this class, if there is in it any further line of section?
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
I think there is one; please help me in making the section.
Younger Socrates
On what line?
Stranger
Take the case of all those whom we conceive of as rulers who give commands: shall we not find that they all issue commands for the sake of producing something?
Younger Socrates
Of course.
Stranger
Furthermore it is not at all difficult to divide all that is produced into two classes.
Younger Socrates
How?
Stranger
Of the whole class, some have life and others have no life.
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
And on these same lines we may, if we like, make a division of the part of intellectual science which commands.
Younger Socrates
In what way?
Stranger
By assigning one part of it to the production of lifeless, the other to that of living objects; and in this way the whole will be divided into two parts.
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
Let us then leave one half and take up the other, and then let us divide that entire half into two parts.
Younger Socrates
Which half shall we take up?
Stranger
That which issues commands relating to living objects, assuredly.
For certainly the science of the king is not, like that of the architect, one which supervises lifeless objects; it is a nobler science, since it exercises its power among living beings and in relation to them alone.
Younger Socrates
True.
Stranger
Now you may notice that the breeding and nurture of living beings is sometimes the nurture of a single animal and sometimes the common care of creatures in droves.
Younger Socrates
True.
Stranger
But we shall find that the statesman is not one who tends a single creature, like the driver of a single ox or the groom who tends a horse; he has more resemblance to a man who tends a herd of cattle or a drove of horses.
Younger Socrates
That seems to be true, now that you mention it.
Stranger
Shall we call the art of caring for many living creatures the art of tending a herd or something like community management?
Younger Socrates
Whichever we happen to say.
Stranger
Good, Socrates!
If you preserve this attitude of indifference to mere names, you will turn out richer in wisdom when you are old.
But now we will, as you suggest, not trouble ourselves about the name; but do you see a way in which a man may show that the art of herding is twofold, and may thereby cause that which is now sought among a double number of things to be sought among half as many?
Younger Socrates
I am quite willing to try.
I think one kind is the care of men, the other that of beasts.
Stranger
You made the division with perfect willingness and courage.
However, let us do our best not to fall again into your error.
Younger Socrates
What error?
Stranger
We must not take a single small part, and set it off against many large ones, nor disregard species in making our division.
On the contrary, the part must be also a species.
It is a very fine thing to separate the object of our search at once from everything else, if the separation can be made correctly, and so, just now, you thought you had the right division and you hurried our discussion along, because you saw that it was leading towards man.
But, my friend, it is not safe to whittle off shavings; it is safer to proceed by cutting through the middle, and in that way one is more likely to find classes.
This makes all the difference in the conduct of research.
Younger Socrates
What do you mean by that, Stranger?
Stranger
I must try to speak still more clearly, Socrates, out of regard for your capacity.
Just at present it is impossible to make the matter entirely plain, but I will try to lay it before you a little more fully for the sake of clearness.
Younger Socrates
What is it, then, that you say we did wrongly in making our division just now?
Stranger
It was very much as if, in undertaking to divide the human race into two parts, one should make the division as most people in this country do; they separate the Hellenic race from all the rest as one, and to all the other races, which are countless in number and have no relation in blood or language to one another, they give the single name "barbarian"; then, because of this single name, they think it is a single species.
Or it was as if a man should think he was dividing number into two classes by cutting off a myriad from all the other numbers, with the notion that he was making one separate class, and then should give one name to all the rest, and because of that name should think that this also formed one class distinct from the other.
A better division, more truly classified and more equal, would be made by dividing number into odd and even, and the human race into male and female; as for the Lydians and Phrygians and various others they could be opposed to the rest and split off from them when it was impossible to find and separate two parts, each of which formed a class.
Younger Socrates
Very true; but that's just the trouble, Stranger: how can we get a clearer knowledge of class and part, and see that they are not the same thing, but different?
Stranger
Socrates, you most excellent young man, it is no small task you impose upon me.
We have already strayed away from our subject more than we ought, and you wish us to wander still farther afield.
So for the present let us return to our subject, as is proper; then we will go on the trail of this other matter by and by, when we have time.
Only take very good care not to imagine that you ever heard me declare flatly
Younger Socrates
What?
Stranger
That class and part are separate from one another.
Younger Socrates
But what did you say?
Stranger
That when there is a class of anything, it must necessarily be a part of the thing of which it is said to be a class; but there is no necessity that a part be also a class.
Please always give this, rather than the other, as my doctrine.
Younger Socrates
I will do so.
Stranger
Then please go on to the next point.
Younger Socrates
What is it?
Stranger
That from which our present digression started.
For I think it started when you were asked how the art of herding should be divided and said with great readiness that there were two kinds of living beings, the human race and a second one, a single class, comprising all the beasts.
Younger Socrates
True.
Stranger
And it was clear to me at the time that you removed a part and then thought that the remainder was one class because you were able to call them all by the same name of beasts.
Younger Socrates
That is true, too.
Stranger
But indeed, my most courageous young friend, perhaps, if there is any other animal capable of thought, such as the crane appears to be, or any other like creature, and it perchance gives names, just as you do, it might in its pride of self oppose cranes to all other animals, and group the rest, men included, under one head, calling them by one name, which might very well be that of beasts.
Now let us try to be on our guard against all that sort of thing.
Younger Socrates
How?
Stranger
By not dividing the whole class of living beings, that so we may avoid such errors.
Younger Socrates
Well, there is no need of dividing the whole.
Stranger
No, certainly not, for it was in that way that we fell into our former error.
Younger Socrates
What do you mean?
Stranger
That part of intellectual science which involves giving commands was a part of our animal-tending class, with especial reference to animals in herds, was it not?
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
Well, even at that stage of our discussion all animals had already been divided into tame and wild.
For if their nature admits of domestication they are called tame; if it does not, they are called wild.
Younger Socrates
Excellent.
Stranger
But the science we are hunting for was, and is, to be sought among tame creatures, more specifically creatures in herds.
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
Let us, then, not make our division as we did before, with a view to all, nor in a hurry, with the idea that we may thus reach political science quickly,
for that has already brought upon us the proverbial penalty.
Younger Socrates
What penalty?
Stranger
The penalty of having made less speed, because we made too much haste and did not make our division right.
Younger Socrates
And it was a good thing for us, Stranger
Stranger
I do not deny it.
So let us begin again and try to divide the art of tending animals in common; for perhaps the information you desire so much will come to you in the ordinary course of our conversation better than by other means.
Tell me
Younger Socrates
What?
Stranger
Whether, as I suppose, you have often heard people speak of this, for I know you never actually saw the preserves of fish in the Nile and in the ponds of the Persian king.
But perhaps you have noticed the like in fountain-pools.
Younger Socrates
Yes, I have often seen the fish in fountain-pools and have heard many tales of those foreign preserves.
Stranger
And surely, even if you have not wandered over the plains of Thessaly, you have heard of goose-farms and crane-farms there and you believe that they exist.
Younger Socrates
Yes, of course.
Stranger
The reason why I asked you all these questions is that the rearing of flocks is in part aquatic and in part an affair of the dry land.
Younger Socrates
Yes, that is true.
Stranger
Then do you agree that we ought to divide the art of tending animals in common into corresponding parts, assigning one part of it to each of these two, and calling one the art of aquatic-herding and the other the art of land-herding?
Younger Socrates
Yes, I agree.
Stranger
And surely we shall not have to ask to which of these two arts kingship belongs, for that is clear to everyone.
Younger Socrates
Of course.
Stranger
Anybody could doubtless make a division of the art of tending herds on land.
Younger Socrates
How?
Stranger
Into the tending of flying and walking animals.
Younger Socrates
Very true.
Stranger
And statesmanship is to be sought in connection with walking animals, is it not?
Any fool, so to speak, would believe that, don't you think?
Younger Socrates
Of course.
Stranger
And the art of tending animals that walk must, like an even number, be divided in half.
Younger Socrates
Evidently.
Stranger
And now I think I see two paths leading in that direction in which our argument has started: the quicker way, by separating a relatively small part and a larger, and the other way, which is more in accord with what we said a while ago about the need of making the division as nearly in the middle as we can, but is longer.
So we can proceed by whichever of the two we wish.
Younger Socrates
Can we not go by both?
Stranger
Not by both at once, silly boy; but obviously we can take them in turn.
Younger Socrates
Then I choose both in turn.
Stranger
That is easy enough, since we have but a short distance to go.
At the beginning, certainly, or middle of our journey it would have been hard to comply with your demand.
But now, since this is your wish, let us go first by the longer way, for we are fresher now and shall get along on it more easily.
So attend to the division.
Younger Socrates
Go on.
Stranger
The tame walking animals which live in herds are divided by nature into two classes.
Younger Socrates
How by nature?
Stranger
Because one class is naturally without horns, and the other has horns.
Younger Socrates
That is obvious.
Stranger
Now divide the art of tending herds of walking animals into two parts, assigning one to each class of animals;
for if you try to give them names, the matter will become needlessly complicated.
Younger Socrates
How shall I speak of them then?
Stranger
In this way: say that the science which tends herds of walking animals is divided into two parts, one of which is assigned to the horned portion of the herd, the other to the hornless portion.
Younger Socrates
Assume that I have said that; for you have made it perfectly clear.
Stranger
And furthermore our "king" is very clearly the herdsman of a herd devoid of horns.
Younger Socrates
Of course; that is evident.
Stranger
Let us then try to break up this herd and give the king the part that belongs to him.
Younger Socrates
Very well.
Stranger
Shall we make our division on the basis of having or not having cloven hoofs, or on that of mixing or not mixing the breed?
You know what I mean.
Younger Socrates
What is it?
Stranger
Why, I mean that horses and asses can breed from each other.
Younger Socrates
Oh yes.
Stranger
But the rest of the herd of hornless tame animals cannot cross the breed.
Younger Socrates
That is true, of course.
Stranger
Well then, does the statesman appear to have charge of a kind that mixes or of one that does not mix the breed?
Younger Socrates
Evidently of one that is unmixed.
Stranger
So I suppose we must proceed as we have done heretofore and divide this into two parts.
Younger Socrates
Yes, we must.
Stranger
And yet tame gregarious animals have all, with the exception of about two species, been already divided;
for dogs are not properly to be counted among gregarious creatures.
Younger Socrates
No, they are not.
But how shall we divide the two species?
Stranger
As you and Theaetetus ought by rights to divide them, since you are interested in geometry.
Younger Socrates
How do you mean?
Stranger
By the diameter, of course, and again by the diameter of the square of the diameter.
Younger Socrates
What do you mean by that?
Stranger
Is the nature which our human race possesses related to walking in any other way than as the diameter which is the square root of two feet?
Younger Socrates
No.
Stranger
And the nature of the remaining species, again, considered from the point of view of the square root, is the diameter of the square of our root, if it is the nature of twice two feet.
Younger Socrates
Of course;
and now I think I almost understand what you wish to make plain.
Stranger
Socrates, do we see that besides this something else has turned up in these divisions of ours which would be a famous joke?
Younger Socrates
What is it?
Stranger
Our human race shares the same lot and runs in the same heat as the most excellent and at the same time most easy-going race of creatures.
Younger Socrates
Yes, I see that; it is a very queer result.
Stranger
Indeed?
But is it not reasonable that they arrive last, who are the slowest?
Younger Socrates
Yes, that is true.
Stranger
And do we fail to notice this further point, that the king appears in a still more ridiculous light, running along with the herd and paired in the race with the man of all others who is most in training for a life of careless ease?
Younger Socrates
Certainly he does.
Stranger
For now, Socrates, we have shown more clearly the truth of that which we said yesterday in our search for the sophist.
Younger Socrates
What was it?
Stranger
That this method of argument pays no more heed to the noble than to the ignoble, and no less honor to the small than to the great, but always goes on its own way to the most perfect truth.
Younger Socrates
So it seems.
Stranger
Then shall I now, without waiting for you to ask me, guide you of my own accord along that shorter way referred to a moment ago that leads to the definition of the king?
Younger Socrates
By all means.
Stranger
I say, then, that we ought at that time to have divided walking animals immediately into biped and quadruped, then seeing that the human race falls into the same division with the feathered creatures and no others, we must again divide the biped class into featherless and feathered, and when that division is made and the art of herding human beings is made plain,
we ought to take the statesmanlike and kingly man and place him as a sort of charioteer therein, handing over to him the reins of the state, because that is his own proper science.
Younger Socrates
You have cleared up the argument finely, and as if it were a debt you were paying, you threw in the digression as interest and for good measure.
Stranger
Now let us go back to the beginning and join together the definition of the name of the statesman's art link by link to the end.
Younger Socrates
By all means.
Stranger
In the first place we said that intellectual science had a part that gives commands;
and a portion of this was called by a comparison the part that gives its own commands;
and again the art of rearing living beings was singled out, which is by no means the smallest part of the art which gives its own commands; and a class of rearing living beings was herd-tending, and a part of this again the herding of walking animals; and from the herding of walking animals the art of rearing those without horns was divided.
And of this in turn one part will have to be treated as no less than threefold, if it is to be called by one comprehensive name, and it will be called () the science () of tending herds () which do not cross breeds.
But the only possible further subdivision of this is the art of herding human beings, and this is at last what we are looking for, the single art called both kingly and statesmanlike.
Younger Socrates
That is perfectly true.
Stranger
And yet, Socrates, have we truly accomplished this, exactly as you have said?
Younger Socrates
Accomplished what?
Stranger
The perfectly satisfactory discussion of our subject.
Or is our investigation incomplete in just this detail, that we have given a definition after a fashion, but have not perfectly completed it?
Younger Socrates
What do you mean?
Stranger
I will try to make still plainer to us both the thought which I now have in mind.
Younger Socrates
Please do so.
Stranger
We found just now that there were many arts of herding, and one of them was the art of statesmanship, which was the care of one particular kind of herd, did we not?
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
And our argument defined this, not as the tending of horses or other beasts, but as the science of tending men in common.
Younger Socrates
Yes, it did.
Stranger
Let us, then, observe the point of difference between kings and all other herdsmen.
Younger Socrates
What point of difference?
Stranger
Let us see whether anyone who is designated by the name of another art says and claims that he is fellow manager of the herd in common with any of the other kinds of herdsmen.
Younger Socrates
What do you mean?
Stranger
For instance, merchants, husbandmen, and all who prepare grain for use, and also gymnastic trainers and physicians would certainly all dispute with the herdsmen of humanity, whom we have called statesmen, and would assert that they themselves take care of the tending of humanity, and not the tending of the common herd only, but even that of the rulers themselves, would they not?
Younger Socrates
And would they be right?
Stranger
Perhaps.
We will examine that matter; but this we know, that no one will ever raise such a contention against any neatherd, but the herdsman himself tends the herd, he is their physician, he is their matchmaker, and he alone knows the midwife's science of aiding at the birth of their offspring.
Moreover, so far as the nature of the creatures allows them to enjoy sport or music, no one can enliven or soothe them better than he; whether with instruments or merely with his voice he performs the music best suited to his own herd;
and the same applies to the other herdsmen.
Is not that the case?
Younger Socrates
You are quite right.
Stranger
Then how can our discourse about the king be right and free from error, when we pick him out alone as herdsman and tender of the human herd, while countless others dispute his claim?
Younger Socrates
It cannot possibly be right.
Stranger
We suspected a little while ago that although we might be outlining a sort of kingly shape we had not yet perfected an accurate portrait of the statesman, and could not do so until, by removing those who crowd about him and contend with him for a share in his herdsmanship, we separated him from them and made him stand forth alone and uncontaminated.
Younger Socrates
It certainly was.
Stranger
Then we must attend to that, Socrates, if we are not to end our argument in disgrace.
Younger Socrates
But we certainly must not do that.
Stranger
Then we must begin again from a new sarting-point and travel by a different road.
Younger Socrates
By what road?
Stranger
By one which offers us some amusement; for there is a famous story a great part of which it is really our duty to insert into our discussion; and then after that we can proceed as before, by eliminating part after part, and in that way reach the ultimate object of our search.
Shall we do that?
Younger Socrates
By all means.
Stranger
Then please pay careful attention to my story, just as if you were a child; and anyway you are not much too old for children's tales.
Younger Socrates
Please tell the story.
Stranger
Of the portents recorded in ancient tales many did happen and will happen again.
Such an one is the portent connected with the tale of the quarrel between Atreus and Thyestes.
You have doubtless heard of it and remember what is said to have taken place.
Younger Socrates
You refer, I suppose, to the token of the golden lamb.
Stranger
Oh no; I mean the change in the rising and setting of the sun and the other heavenly bodies, how in those times they used to set in the quarter where they now rise, and used to rise where they now set, but the god at the time of the quarrel, you recall, changed all that to the present system as a testimony in favor of Atreus.
Younger Socrates
Yes, I've heard that, too.
Stranger
And again we have often heard the tale of the reign of Cronus.
Younger Socrates
Yes, very often.
Stranger
And how about the story that the ancient folk were earthborn and not begotten of one another?
Younger Socrates
That is one of the old tales, too.
Stranger
Well, all these stories and others still more remarkable have their source in one and the same event, but in the lapse of ages some of them have been lost and others are told in fragmentary and disconnected fashion.
But no one has told the event which is the cause of them all, and so I must tell it now; for that will help us to make clear the nature of the king.
Younger Socrates
Very good; just tell your tale and omit nothing.
Stranger
Listen then.
During a certain period God himself goes with the universe as guide in its revolving course, but at another epoch, when the cycles have at length reached the measure of his allotted time, he lets it go, and of its own accord it turns backward in the opposite direction, since it is a living creature and is endowed with intelligence by him who fashioned it in the beginning.
Now this reversal of its motion is an inevitable part of its nature for the following reason.
Younger Socrates
What reason?
Stranger
Absolute and perpetual immutability is a property of only the most divine things of all, and body does not belong to this class.
Now that which we call heaven and the universe has received from its creator many blessed qualities, but then, too, it partakes also of a bodily nature; therefore it is impossible for it to be entirely free from change; it moves, however, so far as it is able to do so, with a single motion in the same place and the same manner, and therefore it has acquired the reverse motion in a circle, because that involves the least deviation from its own motion.
But to turn itself for ever is hardly possible except for the power that guides all moving things; and that this should turn now in one direction and now in the opposite direction is contrary to divine law.
As the result of all this, we must not say either that the universe turns itself always, or that it is always turned by God in two opposite courses, or again that two divinities opposed to one another turn it.
The only remaining alternative is what I suggested a little while ago, that the universe is guided at one time by an extrinsic divine cause, acquiring the power of living again and receiving renewed immortality from the Creator, and at another time it is left to itself and then moves by its own motion, being left to itself at such a moment that it moves backwards through countless ages, because it is immensely large and most evenly balanced, and turns upon the smallest pivot.
Younger Socrates
All that account of yours appears, at any rate, very reasonable.
Stranger
Then, in the light of what has been said, let us consider and gain understanding of the event which we said was the cause of all those wonderful portents;
for it is really just this.
Younger Socrates
Just what?
Stranger
The fact that at certain periods the universe has its present circular motion, and at other periods it revolves in the reverse direction.
Younger Socrates
How was this the cause?
Stranger
We cannot help believing that of all the changes which take place in the heavens this reversal is the greatest and most complete.
Younger Socrates
It certainly seems to be so.
Stranger
Therefore we must also believe that at the same time the greatest changes come upon us who dwell within the heavens.
Younger Socrates
That is likely too.
Stranger
And animals cannot well endure many great and various changes at once, That is a familiar fact, is it not?
Younger Socrates
Of course.
Stranger
Inevitably, then, there is at that time great destruction of animals in general, and only a small part of the human race survives; and the survivors have many experiences wonderful and strange, the greatest of which, a consequence of the reversal of everything at the time when the world begins to turn in the direction opposed to that of its present revolution, is this.
Younger Socrates
What is that experience?
Stranger
First the age of all animals, whatever it was at the moment, stood still, and every mortal creature stopped growing older in appearance and then reversed its growth and became, as it were, younger and more tender; the hoary locks of the old men grew dark, and bearded cheeks grew smooth again as their possessors reverted to their earlier ages, and the bodies of young men grew smoother and smaller day by day and night by night, until they became as new-born babes, to which they were likened in mind and body; and then at last they wasted away entirely and wholly disappeared.
And the bodies of those who died by violence in those times quickly underwent the same changes, were destroyed, and disappeared in a few days.
Younger Socrates
But then, Stranger, how did animals come into existence in those days?
How were they begotten of one another?
Stranger
It is clear, Socrates, that being begotten of one another was no part of the natural order of that time, but the earth-born race which, according to tradition, once existed, was the race which returned at that time out of the earth; and the memory of it was preserved by our earliest ancestors, who were born in the beginning of our period and therefore were next neighbors to the end of the previous period of the world's revolution, with no interval between.
For they were to us the heralds of these stories which are nowadays unduly disbelieved by many people.
For you must, I think, consider what would result.
It is a natural consequence of the return of the old to childhood that those who are dead and lying in the earth take shape and come to life again, since the process of birth is reversed along with the reversal of the world's revolution; for this reason they are inevitably earth-born, and hence arises their name and the tradition about them, except those of them whom God removed to some other fate.
Younger Socrates
Certainly that follows from what preceded.
But was the life in the reign of Cronus, which you mentioned, in that previous period of revolution or in ours?
For evidently the change in the course of the stars and the sun takes place in both periods.
Stranger
You have followed my account very well.
No, the life about which you ask, when all the fruits of the earth sprang up of their own accord for men, did not belong at all to the present period of revolution, but this also belonged to the previous one.
For then, in the beginning, God ruled and supervised the whole revolution, and so again, in the same way, all the parts of the universe were divided by regions among gods who ruled them,
and, moreover, the animals were distributed by species and flocks among inferior deities as divine shepherds, each of whom was in all respects the independent guardian of the creatures under his own care, so that no creature was wild, nor did they eat one another, and there was no war among them, nor any strife whatsoever.
To tell all the other consequences of such an order of the world would be an endless task.
But the reason for the story of the spontaneous life of mankind is as follows:
God himself was their shepherd, watching over them, just as man, being an animal of different and more divine nature than the rest, now tends the lower species of animals.
And under his care there were no states, nor did men possess wives or children;
for they all came to life again out of the earth, with no recollection of their former lives.
So all such things they were lacking, but they had fruits in plenty from the trees and other plants, which the earth furnished them of its own accord, without help from agriculture.
And they lived for the most part in the open air, without clothing or bedding; for the climate was tempered for their comfort, and the abundant grass that grew up out of the earth furnished them soft couches.
That, Socrates, was the life of men in the reign of Cronus;
but the life of the present age, which is said to be the age of Zeus, you know by your own experience.
Would you be able and willing to decide which of them is the more blessed?
Younger Socrates
Certainly not.
Stranger
Shall I, then, make some sort of a judgement for you?
Younger Socrates
Do so, by all means.
Stranger
Well, then, if the foster children of Cronus, having all this leisure and the ability to converse not only with human beings but also with beasts,
made full use of all these opportunities with a view to philosophy, talking with the animals and with one another and learning from every creature that, through possession of some peculiar power he may have had in any respect beyond his fellows perceptions tending towards an increase of wisdom, it would be easy to decide that the people of those old times were immeasurably happier than those of our epoch.
Or if they merely ate and drank till they were full and gossiped with each other and the animals, telling such stories as are even now told about them, in that case, too, it would, in my opinion, be very easy to reach a decision.
However, let us pass those matters by, so long as there is no one capable of reporting to us what the desires of the people in those days were in regard to knowledge and the employment of speech.
The reason why we revived this legend must be told, in order that we may get ahead afterwards.
For when the time of all those conditions was accomplished and the change was to take place and all the earth-born race had at length been used up, since every soul had fulfilled all its births by falling into the earth as seed its prescribed number of times, then the helmsman of the universe dropped the tiller and withdrew to his place of outlook, and fate and innate desire made the earth turn backwards.
So, too, all the gods who share, each in his own sphere, the rule of the Supreme Spirit, promptly perceiving what was taking place, let go the parts of the world which were under their care.
And as the universe was turned back and there came the shock of collision, as the beginning and the end rushed in opposite directions, it produced a great earthquake within itself and caused a new destruction of all sorts of living creatures.
But after that, when a sufficient time had elapsed,
there was rest now from disturbance and confusion, calm followed the earthquakes, and the world went on its own accustomed course in orderly fashion, exercising care and rule over itself and all within itself, and remembering and practising the teachings of the Creator and Father to the extent of its power,
at first more accurately and at last more carelessly; and the reason for this was the material element in its composition, because this element, which was inherent in the primeval nature, was infected with great disorder before the attainment of the existing orderly universe.
For from its Composer the universe has received only good things;
but from its previous condition it retains in itself and creates in the animals all the elements of harshness and injustice which have their origin in the heavens.
Now as long as the world was nurturing the animals within itself under the guidance of the Pilot, it produced little evil and great good;
but in becoming separated from him it always got on most excellently during the time immediately after it was let go, but as time went on and it grew forgetful, the ancient condition of disorder prevailed more and more and towards the end of the time reached its height, and the universe, mingling but little good with much of the opposite sort, was in danger of destruction for itself and those within it.
Therefore at that moment God, who made the order of the universe, perceived that it was in dire trouble, and fearing that it might founder in the tempest of confusion and sink in the boundless sea of diversity, he took again his place as its helmsman, reversed whatever had become unsound and unsettled in the previous period when the world was left to itself, set the world in order, restored it and made it immortal and ageless.
So now the whole tale is told;
but for our purpose of exhibiting the nature of the king it will be enough to revert to the earlier part of the story.
For when the universe was turned again into the present path of generation, the age of individuals came again to a stop, and that led to new processes, the reverse of those which had gone before.
For the animals which had grown so small as almost to disappear grew larger, and those newly born from the earth with hoary hair died and passed below the earth again.
And all other things changed, imitating the condition of the universe and conforming to it, and so too pregnancy and birth and nurture necessarily imitated and conformed to the rest;
for no living creature could any longer come into being by the union of other elements, but just as the universe was ordered to be the ruler of its own course, so in the same way the parts were ordered, so far as they could, to grow and beget and give nourishment of themselves under the same guidance.
And now we have come at last to the point for the sake of which this whole discourse was begun.
For much might be said, and at great length, about the other animals, their previous forms and the causes of their several changes;
but about mankind there is less to say and it is more to our purpose.
For men, deprived of the care of the deity who had possessed and tended us, since most of the beasts who were by nature unfriendly had grown fierce, and they themselves were feeble and unprotected, were ravaged by the beasts and were in the first ages still without resources or skill; the food which had formerly offered itself freely had failed them, and they did not yet know how to provide for themselves, because no necessity had hitherto compelled them.
On all these accounts they were in great straits;
and that is the reason why the gifts of the gods that are told of in the old traditions were given us with the needful information and instruction, fire by Prometheus, the arts by Hephaestus and the goddess who is his fellow-artisan, seeds and plants by other deities.
And from these has arisen all that constitutes human life, since, as I said a moment ago, the care of the gods had failed men and they had to direct their own lives and take care of themselves, like the whole universe, which we imitate and follow through all time, being born and living now in our present manner and in that other epoch in the other manner.
So, then, let our tale be finished; but we will turn it to account for opening our eyes to the great error we made in the exposition of the king and the statesman in our earlier discussion.
Younger Socrates
How, then, did we err, and what is the great error you say we have committed?
Stranger
In one way we made a comparatively slight error, in another a very important one, much greater and more far-reaching than the first.
Younger Socrates
How did we do that?
Stranger
When we were asked about the king and the statesman of the present movement of the world and mode of generation, we told of the shepherd of the human flock in the time of the reverse movement, and he was a god, not a man, besides.
That was a very great error.
Then when we declared that he was ruler of the whole state, but did not fully tell in what manner he ruled, what we said was true, though it was not complete nor clear, and therefore our error was less in this case than in the other.
Younger Socrates
True.
Stranger
Apparently, then, we must expect a complete description of the statesman only when we have defined the manner of his rule over the state.
Younger Socrates
Very good.
Stranger
And this is why I introduced the myth, not only in order to show that all men compete for the care of the flock with him whom we are now seeking, but also that we may more clearly see him who alone ought to have the care of human beings as shepherds and neatherds care for their flocks and herds, and therefore alone deserves to be honored with that appellation.
Younger Socrates
Quite right.
Stranger
I think, Socrates, that the form of the divine shepherd is greater than that of the king, whereas the statesmen who now exist here are by nature much more like their subjects, with whom they share much more nearly the same breeding and education.
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
And yet they would have to be investigated with precisely the same care, whether their nature be like that of their subjects or like that of the divine shepherd.
Younger Socrates
Of course.
Stranger
Then let us go back to this point:
the art which we said gave its own orders and had to do with living beings, but had charge of them not singly but in common, and which we at once called the art of the herdsman, do you remember?
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
Well, it was in connection with that, somewhere, that we made our mistake;
for we never included or named the statesman; unobserved by us he slipped out of our nomenclature.
Younger Socrates
How so?
Stranger
All the other herdsmen have this in common that they feed their respective herds; but the statesman does not, yet we gave him the name of herdsman, when we ought to have given him one which is common to them all.
Younger Socrates
True, if there were such a name.
Stranger
Is not caring for herds common to them all, with no especial mention of feeding or any other activity?
If we called it an art of tending herds or caring for them or managing them, as all herdsmen do, we could wrap up the statesman with the rest, since the argument showed that we ought to do so.
Younger Socrates
Quite right;
but how would the next division be made?
Stranger
Just as we divided the art of feeding herds before by distinguishing between those that go on foot and the winged, and the unmixed breeds and the hornless, we might divide the art of tending herds by these same distinctions, embracing in the word both the kingship of the present time and that of the time of Cronus.
Younger Socrates
Evidently; but again I wonder what the next step is.
Stranger
It Is clear that if we had used the word "tending" herds, we should never have met with the contention that there is no caring for them at all in statesmanship, though the earlier contention was justified that there is no art in the case of human beings that deserves the name of feeding, and if there be such an art, it belongs much more to many others than to the king.
Younger Socrates
Quite right.
Stranger
But no other art would advance a stronger claim than that of kingship to be the art of caring for the whole human community and ruling all mankind.
Younger Socrates
You are right.
Stranger
And after all this, Socrates, do we see that another great error was committed at the very end?
Younger Socrates
What was it?
Stranger
Why, it was this: No matter how strong our belief that there was an art of feeding the biped herd, we ought not to have called it kingship and statecraft on the spot, as if it were all quite settled.
Younger Socrates
What ought we to have done, then?
Stranger
In the first place, as we said, we ought to have remodelled the name, making it denote care, rather than feeding, and then we ought to have divided the art, for it may still admit of not unimportant divisions.
Younger Socrates
What are they?
Stranger
There is one by which we might have divided the divine shepherd from the human caretaker.
Younger Socrates
Quite right.
Stranger
And again it was essential that the art of caretaking thus isolated and assigned to man be divided into two parts.
Younger Socrates
On what line of division?
Stranger
On that of compulsory and voluntary.
Younger Socrates
Why is that?
Stranger
Because this was about the point at which we made our mistake before; we were more simple-minded than we should have been, and we put the king and the tyrant together, whereas they and their respective modes of ruling are quite unlike.
Younger Socrates
True.
Stranger
But now shall we, as I said, correct ourselves and divide the care of humanity into two parts, by the criterion of the compulsory and the voluntary?
Younger Socrates
By all means.
Stranger
And if we call the art of those who use compulsion tyrannical or something of the sort and the voluntary care of voluntary bipeds political, may we not declare that he who possesses this latter art of caretaking is really the true king and statesman?
Younger Socrates
Well, Stranger, it looks as though our account of the statesman were complete now.
Stranger
That would be a fine thing for us, Socrates.
But not you alone must think so; I must think so, too, in agreement with you.
As a matter of fact, however, in my opinion our figure of the king is not yet perfect,
but like statue-makers who sometimes in their misapplied enthusiasm make too numerous and too large additions and thus delay the completion of their several works, we too, at this time, wishing to make quick progress, and also to make clear in a grand style the error of our previous course, and, moreover,
fancying that the use of great illustrations was proper in the case of a king, have taken up a marvellous mass of myth and have consequently been obliged to use a greater part of it than we should.
So we have made our discourse too long and after all have never made an end of the tale, but our talk, just like a picture of a living creature, seems to have a good enough outline, but not yet to have received the clearness that comes from pigments and the blending of colors.
And yet it is more fitting to portray any living being by speech and argument than by painting or any handicraft whatsoever to persons who are able to follow argument; but to others it is better to do it by means of works of craftsmanship.
Younger Socrates
That is true; but explain wherein you think our exposition is still deficient.
Stranger
It is difficult, my dear fellow, to set forth any of the greater ideas, except by the use of examples;
for it would seem that each of us knows everything that he knows as if in a dream and then again, when he is as it were awake, knows nothing of it all.
Younger Socrates
What do you mean by that?
Stranger
I seem at present in absurd fashion to have touched upon our experience in regard to knowledge.
Younger Socrates
In what respect?
Stranger
Why, my friend, the very example I employ requires another example.
Younger Socrates
Indeed what is it? Don't hesitate to tell on my account.
Stranger
I will tell, since you on your part are prepared to listen.
We know that children, when they are just getting some knowledge of letters
Younger Socrates
Well?
Stranger
Recognize the several letters well enough in the short and easy syllables, and can make correct statements about them.
Younger Socrates
Yes, of course.
Stranger
And then again in other syllables they are in doubt about those same letters, and err in opinion and speech about them.
Younger Socrates
Yes, certainly.
Stranger
Would not the easiest and best way to lead them to the letters which they do not yet know be this?
Younger Socrates
What?
Stranger
To lead them first to those cases in which they had correct opinions about these same letters and then to lead them and set them beside the groups which they did not yet recognize and by comparing them to show that their nature is the same in both combinations alike, and to continue until the letters about which their opinions are correct have been shown in juxtaposition with all those of which they are ignorant.
Being shown in this way they become examples and bring it about that every letter is in all syllables always called by the same name, either by differentiation from the other letters, in case it is different, or because it is the same.
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
Is this, then, a satisfactory definition, that an example is formed when that which is the same in some second unconnected thing is rightly conceived and compared with the first, so that the two together form one true idea?
Younger Socrates
Evidently.
Stranger
Can we wonder, then, that our soul, whose nature involves it in the same uncertainty about the letters or elements of all things, is sometimes in some cases firmly grounded in the truth about every detail, and again in other cases is all at sea about everything, and somehow or other has correct opinions about some combinations, and then again is ignorant of the same things when they are transferred to the long and difficult syllables of life?
Younger Socrates
Surely we need not wonder at that.
Stranger
No; for could anyone, my friend, who begins with false opinion, ever attain to even a small part of truth and acquire wisdom?
Younger Socrates
No; it is hardly possible.
Stranger
Then if this is the case, would it be a bad thing if you and I first tried to see in another small and partial example the nature of example in general, with the intention of transferring afterwards the same figurative method from lesser things to the most exalted eminence of the king, and trying by means of an example to become acquainted in a scientific way with the management of states, in order that this may be waking knowledge for us, not dream knowledge?
Younger Socrates
That is a very good idea.
Stranger
Then we must take up our former argument again, and since there are countless others who contend that they, rather than the royal class, have the care of states, we must accordingly remove all these and isolate the king; and, as we said, to accomplish this we need an example.
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
What example could we apply which is very small, but has the same kind of activity as statesmanship and would enable us satisfactorily to discover that which we seek?
What do you say, Socrates, if we have nothing else at hand, to taking at random the art of weaving?
and, if you please, not the whole of that?
For perhaps the art of weaving wool will be enough; if we choose that part only it will probably furnish us with the illustration we desire.
Younger Socrates
Agreed.
Stranger
Then just as we divided each subject before by cutting off parts from parts, why not now apply the same process to the art of weaving and, by going through all the steps as briefly as we possibly can, arrive quickly at that which serves our present purpose?
Younger Socrates
What do you mean?
Stranger
I will answer you by actually going through the process.
Younger Socrates
Excellent
Stranger
Well, then, all things which we make or acquire are for the sake of doing something or else they are for defence against suffering; and of the defensive class some are spells and antidotes, both divine and human, and some are material defences; and of the material defences some are equipment for war and some are protections; and of protections some are screens and some are defences against heat and cold; and such defences are either shelters or coverings; and coverings are either rugs to spread under us or wrappings to wrap round us; and wrappings are either all of one piece or composed of several pieces; and of the composite garments some are stitched and others put together without stitching; and of the unstitched some are made of the fibres of plants and some are of hair; and of those made with hair some are stuck together with liquids and cement and others are fastened without any such extraneous matter.
Now to these protective coverings made of materials fastened without extraneous matter we give the name of clothes; and just as we called the art statecraft which was concerned with the state, so we shall call the art concerned with clothes, from the nature of its activity, clothes-making, shall we not?
And may we say further that weaving, in so far as the greatest part of it is, as we saw, concerned with the making of clothes, differs in name only from this art of clothes-making, just as in the other case the royal art differed from statecraft?
Younger Socrates
That is perfectly correct.
Stranger
Let us next reflect that a person might think that this description of the art of weaving was satisfactory, because he cannot understand that it has not yet been distinguished from the closely co-operative arts, though it has been separated from many other kindred arts.
Younger Socrates
What kindred arts?
Stranger
You do not seem to have followed what I have been saying; so I think I had better go back again and begin at the end.
For if you understand what I mean by kinship, we distinguished from clothing something akin to it a moment ago when we separated rugs from it by the distinction between spreading under and wrapping round.
Younger Socrates
I understand.
Stranger
And we removed the entire manufacture of cloth made from flax and broom-cords and all that we just now called vegetable fibres; and then, too, we separated off the process of felting and the kind of joining that employs piercing and sewing, most important of which is the shoemaker's art.
Younger Socrates
Yes, to be sure.
Stranger
And we separated off the art of making coverings of leather in single pieces and all the arts of making shelters, which we find in house-building and carpentering in general and in other methods of protection against water, and all the arts which furnish protection against theft and acts of violence, the arts, that is to say, of making lids and constructing doors, which are regarded as parts of the joiner's art; and we cut off the armorer's art, which is a section of the great and various function of making defences; and at the very beginning we cut off the whole art of magic which is concerned with antidotes and spells, and we have left, as it would seem, just the art we were seeking, which furnishes protection from the weather, manufactures a defence of wool, and is called the art of weaving.
Younger Socrates
That seems to be the case.
Stranger
But, my boy, this is not yet completely stated;
for the man who is engaged in the first part of the making of clothes appears to do something the opposite of weaving.
Younger Socrates
How so?
Stranger
The process of weaving is, I take it, a kind of joining together.
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
But the first part I refer to is a separation of what is combined and matted together.
Younger Socrates
What do you mean?
Stranger
The work of the carder's art.
Or shall we have the face to say that carding is weaving and the carder is a weaver?
Younger Socrates
No, certainly not.
Stranger
And surely if we say the art of making the warp or the woof is the art of weaving, we are employing an irrational and false designation.
Younger Socrates
Of course.
Stranger
Well then, shall we say that the whole arts of fulling and mending are no part of the care and treatment of clothes, or shall we declare that these also are entirely included in the art of weaving?
Younger Socrates
By no means.
Stranger
But surely all these will contest the claim of the art of weaving in the matter of the treatment and the production of clothes; they will grant that the part of weaving is the most important, but will claim that their own parts are of some importance, too.
Younger Socrates
Yes, certainly.
Stranger
Then we must believe that besides these the arts which produce the tools by means of which the works of weaving are accomplished will claim to be collaborators in every work of weaving.
Younger Socrates
Quite right.
Stranger
Will our definition of the art of weaving (I mean the part of it we selected) be satisfactory if we say that of all the activities connected with woollen clothing it is the noblest and the greatest?
Or would that, although it contains some truth, yet lack clearness and completeness until we separate from weaving all these other arts?
Younger Socrates
You are right.
Stranger
Then shall our next move be to do this, that our discussion may proceed in due order?
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
First, then, let us observe that there are two arts involved in all production.
Younger Socrates
What are they?
Stranger
The one is a contingent cause, the other is the actual cause.
Younger Socrates
What do you mean?
Stranger
Those arts which do not produce the actual thing in question, but which supply to the arts which do produce it the tools without which no art could ever perform its prescribed work, may be called contingent causes, and those which produce the actual thing are causes.
Younger Socrates
At any rate, that is reasonable.
Stranger
Next, then, shall we designate all the arts which produce spindles, shuttles, and the various other tools that partake in the production of clothing as contingent causes, and those which treat and manufacture the clothing itself as causes?
Younger Socrates
Quite right.
Stranger
And among the causal arts we may properly include washing and mending and all the care of clothing in such ways; and, since the art of adornment is a wide one, we may classify them as a part of it under the name of fulling.
Younger Socrates
Good.
Stranger
And, again, carding and spinning and all the processes concerned with the actual fabrication of the clothing under consideration, form collectively one art familiar to every one the art of wool-working.
Younger Socrates
Of course.
Stranger
And wool-working comprises two divisions, and each of these is a part of two arts at once.
Younger Socrates
How is that?
Stranger
Carding, and one half of the use of the weaver's rod, and the other crafts which separate things that are joined all this collectively is a part of the art of wool-working; and in all things we found two great arts, that of composition and that of division.
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
Now carding and all the other processes just mentioned are parts of the art of division; for the art of division in wool and threads, exercised in one way with the rod and in another with the hands, has all the names just mentioned.
Younger Socrates
Yes, certainly.
Stranger
Then let us again take up something which is at once a part of the arts of composition and of wool-working.
Let us put aside all that belongs to division, making two parts of wool-working, by applying the principles of division and of composition.
Younger Socrates
Let us make that distinction.
Stranger
The part which belongs at once to composition and to wool-working, Socrates, you must allow us to divide again, if we are to get a satisfactory concept of the aforesaid art of weaving.
Younger Socrates
Then we must divide it.
Stranger
Yes, we must; and let us call one part of it the art of twisting threads, and the other the art of intertwining them.
Younger Socrates
I am not sure I understand.
By the art of twisting I think you mean the making of the warp.
Stranger
Not that only, but also the making of the woof.
We shall not find that the woof is made without twisting, shall we?
Younger Socrates
No, of course not.
Stranger
Well, just define warp and woof; perhaps the definition would serve you well at this junction.
Younger Socrates
How shall I do it?
Stranger
In this way: A piece of carded wool, which is lengthened out and is wide, is said to be a lap of wool, is it not?
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
And if any such lap of wool is twisted with a spindle and made into a hard thread, we call the thread warp, and the art which governs this process is the art of spinning the warp.
Younger Socrates
Right.
Stranger
And the threads, in turn, which are more loosely twisted and have in respect to the force used in the carding a softness adapted to the interweaving with the warp we will call the woof, and the art devoted to these we will call the art of preparing the woof.
Younger Socrates
Quite right.
Stranger
So now the part of the art of weaving which we chose for our discussion is clear to pretty much every understanding;
for when that part of the art of composition which is included in the art of weaving forms a web by the right intertwining of woof and warp, we call the entire web a woollen garment, and the art which directs this process we call weaving.
Younger Socrates
Quite right.
Stranger
Very good.
Then why in the world did we not say at once that weaving is the intertwining of woof and warp?
Why did we beat about the bush and make a host of futile distinctions?
Younger Socrates
For my part, I thought nothing that was said was futile, Stranger.
Stranger
And no wonder; but perhaps you might change your mind.
Now to avoid any such malady, in case it should, as is not unlikely, attack you frequently hereafter, I will propose a principle of procedure which is applicable to all cases of this sort.
Younger Socrates
Do so.
Stranger
First, then, let us scrutinize the general nature of excess and deficiency, for the sake of obtaining a rational basis for any praise or blame we may bestow upon excessive length or brevity in discussions of this kind.
Younger Socrates
Yes, that is a good thing to do.
Stranger
Then the proper subjects for our consideration would, I fancy, be these.
Younger Socrates
What?
Stranger
Length and shortness and excess and deficiency in general; for all of them may be regarded as the subjects of the art of measurement.
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
Let us, then, divide that art into two parts; that is essential for our present purpose.
Younger Socrates
Please tell how to make the division.
Stranger
In this way: one part is concerned with relative greatness or smallness, the other with the something without which production would not be possible.
Younger Socrates
What do you mean?
Stranger
Do you not think that, by the nature of the case, we must say that the greater is greater than the less and than nothing else, and that the less is less than the greater and than nothing else?
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
But must we not also assert the real existence of excess beyond the standard of the mean, and of inferiority to the mean, whether in words or deeds, and is not the chief difference between good men and bad found in such excess or deficiency?
Younger Socrates
That is clear.
Stranger
Then we must assume that there are these two kinds of great and small, and these two ways of distinguishing between them; we must not, as we did a little while ago, say that they are relative to one another only, but rather, as we have just said, that one kind is relative in that way, and the other is relative to the standard of the mean.
Should we care to learn the reason for this?
Younger Socrates
Of course.
Stranger
If we assert that the greater has no relation to anything except the less, it will never have any relation to the standard of the mean, will it?
Younger Socrates
No.
Stranger
Will not this doctrine destroy the arts and their works one and all, and do away also with statesmanship, which we are now trying to define, and with weaving, which we did define?
For all these are doubtless careful about excess and deficiency in relation to the standard of the mean; they regard them not as non-existent, but as real difficulties in actual practice, and it is in this way, when they preserve the standard of the mean, that all their works are good and beautiful.
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
And if we do away with the art of statesmanship, our subsequent search for the kingly art will be hopeless, will it not?
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
Then just as in the case of the sophist we forced the conclusion that not-being exists, since that was the point at which we had lost our hold of the argument, so now we must force this second conclusion, that the greater and the less are to be measured in relation, not only to one another, but also to the establishment of the standard of the mean, must we not?
For if this is not admitted, neither the statesman nor any other man who has knowledge of practical affairs can be said without any doubt to exist.
Younger Socrates
Then we must by all means do now the same that we did then.
Stranger
This, Socrates, is a still greater task than that was; and yet we remember how long that took us; but it is perfectly fair to make about them some such assumption as this.
Younger Socrates
As what?
Stranger
That sometime we shall need this principle of the mean for the demonstration of absolute precise truth.
But our belief that the demonstration is for our present purpose good and sufficient is, in my opinion, magnificently supported by this argument that we must believe that all the arts alike exist and that the greater and the less are measured in relation not only to one another but also to the establishment of the standard of the mean.
For if this exists, they exist also, and if they exist, it exists also, but neither can ever exist if the other does not.
Younger Socrates
That is quite right.
But what comes next?
Stranger
We should evidently divide the science of measurement into two parts in accordance with what has been said.
One part comprises all the arts which measure number, length, depth, breadth, and thickness in relation to their opposites; the other comprises those which measure them in relation to the moderate, the fitting, the opportune, the needful, and all the other standards that are situated in the mean between the extremes.
Younger Socrates
Both of your divisions are extensive, and there is a great difference between them.
Stranger
Yes, for what many clever persons occasionally say, Socrates, fancying that it is a wise remark, namely, that the science of measurement has to do with everything, is precisely the same as what we have just said.
For in a certain way all things which are in the province of art do partake of measurement;
but because people are not in the habit of considering things by dividing them into classes, they hastily put these widely different relations into the same category, thinking they are alike;
and again they do the opposite of this when they fail to divide other things into parts.
What they ought to do is this: when a person at first sees only the unity or common quality of many things, he must not give up until he sees all the differences in them, so far as they exist in classes;
and conversely, when all sorts of dissimilarities are seen in a large number of objects he must find it impossible to be discouraged or to stop until has gathered into one circle of similarity all the things which are related to each other and has included them in some sort of class on the basis of their essential nature.
No more need be said, then, about this or about deficiency and excess;
let us only bear carefully in mind that two kinds of measurement which apply to them have been found, and let us remember what those kinds are.
Younger Socrates
We will remember.
Stranger
Now that we have finished this discussion, let us take up another which concerns the actual objects of our inquiry and the conduct of such discussions in general.
Younger Socrates
What is it?
Stranger
Suppose we were asked the following question about a group of pupils learning their letters: "When a pupil is asked of what letters some word or other composed, is the question asked for the sake of the one particular word before him or rather to make him more learned about all words in the lesson?"
Younger Socrates
Clearly to make him more learned about them all.
Stranger
And how about our own investigation of the statesman?
Has it been undertaken for the sake of his particular subject or rather to make us better thinkers about all subjects?
Younger Socrates
Clearly this also is done with a view to them all.
Stranger
Of course no man of sense would wish to pursue the discussion of weaving for its own sake;
but most people, it seems to me, fail to notice that some things have sensible resemblances which are easily perceived; and it is not at all difficult to show them when anyone wishes, in response to a request for an explanation of some one of them, to exhibit them easily without trouble and really without explanation.
But, on the other hand, the greatest and noblest conceptions have no image wrought plainly for human vision, which he who wishes to satisfy the mind of the inquirer can apply to some one of his senses and by mere exhibition satisfy the mind.
We must therefore endeavor by practice to acquire the power of giving and understanding a rational definition of each one of them; for immaterial things, which are the noblest and greatest, can be exhibited by reason only, and it is for their sake that all we are saying is said.
But it is always easier to practise in small matters than in greater ones.
Younger Socrates
Excellent.
Stranger
Let us, then, remember the reason for all that we have said about these matters.
Younger Socrates
What is the reason?
Stranger
The reason is chiefly just that irritating impatience which we exhibited in relation to the long talk about weaving and the revolution of the universe and the sophist's long talk about the existence of not-being.
We felt that they were too long, and we reproached ourselves for all of them, fearing that our talk was not only long, but irrelevant.
Consider, therefore, that the reason for what has just been said is my wish to avoid any such impatience in the future.
Younger Socrates
Very well.
Please go on with what you have to say.
Stranger
What I have to say, then, is that you and I, remembering what has just been said, must praise or blame the brevity or length of our several discussions, not by comparing their various lengths with one another, but with reference to that part of the science of measurement which we said before must be borne in mind; I mean the standard of fitness.
Younger Socrates
Quite right.
Stranger
But we must not always judge of length by fitness, either.
For we shall not in the least want a length that is fitted to give pleasure, except, perhaps, as a secondary consideration;
and again reason counsels us to accept fitness for the easiest and quickest completion of the inquiry in which we are engaged, not as the first, but as the second thing to be desired.
By far our first and most important object should be to exalt the method itself of ability to divide by classes, and therefore, if a discourse, even though it be very long, makes the hearer better able to discover the truth, we should accept it eagerly and should not be offended by its length, or if it is short, we should judge it in the same way.
And, moreover, anyone who finds fault with the length of discourses in our discussions, or objects to roundabout methods, must not merely find fault with the speeches for their length and then pass them quickly and hastily by, but he must also show that there is ground for the belief that if they had been briefer they would have made their hearers better dialecticians and quicker to discover through reason the truth of realities.
About other people and the praise or blame they direct towards other qualities in discourse, we need not be concerned; we need not even appear to hear them.
But enough of this, if you feel about it as I do; so let us go back to the statesman and apply to him the example of weaving that we spoke of a while ago.
Younger Socrates
Very well; let us do so.
Stranger
The art of the king, then, has been separated from most of the kindred arts, or rather from all the arts that have to do with herds.
There remain, however, the arts that have to do with the state itself.
These are both causes and contingent causes, and our first duty is to separate them from one another.
Younger Socrates
Quite right.
Stranger
It is not easy to divide them into halves, you know.
But I think the reason will nevertheless be clear as we go on.
Younger Socrates
Then we had better divide in another way.
Stranger
Let us divide them, then, like an animal that is sacrificed, by joints, since we cannot bisect them;
for we must always divide into a number of parts as near two as possible.
Younger Socrates
How shall we do it in the present instance?
Stranger
Just as in the previous case, you know, we classed all the arts which furnished tools for weaving as contingent causes.
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
So now we must do the same thing, but it is even more imperative.
For all the arts which furnish any implement, great or small, for the state, must be classed as contingent causes;
for without them neither state nor statesmanship could ever exist, and yet I do not suppose we shall reckon any of them as the work of the kingly art.
Younger Socrates
No.
Stranger
We shall certainly be undertaking a hard task in separating this class from the rest; for it might be said that everything that exists is the instrument of something or other, and the statement seems plausible.
But there are possessions of another kind in the state, about which I wish to say something.
Younger Socrates
What do you wish to say?
Stranger
That they do not possess this instrumental function.
For they are not, like tools or instruments, made for the purpose of being causes of production, but exist for the preservation of that which has been produced.
Younger Socrates
What is this class of possessions?
Stranger
That very various class which is made with dry and wet materials and such as are wrought by fire and without fire; it is called collectively the class of receptacles; it is a very large class and has, so far as I can see, nothing at all to do with the art we are studying.
Younger Socrates
No, of course not.
Stranger
And there is a third very large class of possessions to be noticed, differing from these; it is found on land and on water, it wanders about and is stationary, it is honorable and without honor, but it has one name, because the whole class is always a seat for some one and exists to be sat upon.
Younger Socrates
What is it?
Stranger
We call it a vehicle, and it certainly is not at all the work of statesmanship, but much rather that of the arts of carpentry, pottery and bronze-working.
Younger Socrates
I understand.
Stranger
And is there a fourth class?
Shall we say that there is one, differing from those three, one to which most of the things we have mentioned belong all clothing, most arms, all circuit walls of earth or of stone, and countless other things?
And since they are all made for defence, they may most rightly be called by the collective name of defence, and this may much more properly be considered for the most part the work of the art of building or of weaving than of statesmanship.
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
And should we care to make a fifth class, of ornamentation and painting and all the imitations created by the use of painting and music solely for our pleasure and properly included under one name?
Younger Socrates
What is its name?
Stranger
It is called by some such name as plaything.
Younger Socrates
To be sure.
Stranger
So this one name will properly be applied to all the members of this class; for none of them is practised for any serious purpose, but all of them merely for play.
Younger Socrates
I understand that pretty well, too.
Stranger
And shall we not make a sixth class of that which furnishes to all these the materials of which and in which all the arts we have mentioned fashion their works, a very various class, the offspring of many other arts?
Younger Socrates
What do you mean?
Stranger
Gold and silver and all the products of the mines and all the materials which tree-felling and wood-cutting in general cut and provide for carpentry and basket-weaving; and then, too, the art of stripping the bark from plants and the leather-worker's art which takes off the skins of animals, and all the other arts which have to do with such matters, and those that make corks and paper and cords and enable us to manufacture composite classes of things from kinds that are not composite.
We call all this, as one class, the primary and simple possession of man, and it is in no way the work of the kingly science.
Younger Socrates
Good.
Stranger
And property in food and all the things which, mingling parts of themselves with parts of the body, have any function of keeping it in health, we may say is the seventh class, and we will call it collectively our nourishment, unless we have some better name to give it.
All this we can assign to the arts of husbandry, hunting, gymnastics, medicine, and cooking more properly than to that of statesmanship.
Younger Socrates
Of course.
Stranger
Now I think I have in these seven classes mentioned nearly all kinds of property except tame animals.
See: there was the primary possession, which ought in justice to have been placed first, and after this the instrument, receptacle, vehicle, defence, plaything, nourishment.
Whatever we have omitted, unless some important thing has been overlooked, can find its place in one of those classes; for instance, the group of coins, seals, and stamps,
for there is not among these any kinship such as to form a large class, but some of them can be made to fit into the class of ornaments, others into that of instruments, though the classification is somewhat forced.
All property in tame animals, except slaves, is included in the art of herding, which has already been divided into parts.
Younger Socrates
Yes quite true.
Stranger
There remains the class of slaves and servants in general, and here I prophesy that we shall find those who set up claims against the king for the very fabric of his art, just as the spinners and carders and the rest of whom we spoke advanced claims against the weavers a while ago.
All the others, whom we called contingent causes, have been removed along with the works we just mentioned and have been separated from the activity of the king and the statesman.
Younger Socrates
That seems to be the case, at least.
Stranger
Come then, let us step up and look from close at hand at those who are left, that so we may know them more surely.
Younger Socrates
Yes, that is what we should do.
Stranger
We shall find, then, that the greatest servants, when seen from near at hand, are in conduct and condition the opposite of that which we suspected.
Younger Socrates
Who are they?
Stranger
The bought servants, acquired by purchase, whom we can without question call slaves.
They make no claim to any share in the kingly art.
Younger Socrates
Certainly not.
Stranger
How about those free men who put themselves voluntarily in the position of servants of those whom we mentioned before?
I mean the men who carry about and distribute among one another the productions of husbandry and the other arts, whether in the domestic marketplaces or by travelling from city to city by land or sea, exchanging money for wares or money for money, the men whom we call brokers, merchants, shipmasters, and peddlers; do they lay any claim to statesmanship?
Younger Socrates
Possibly to commercial statesmanship
Stranger
But certainly we shall never find laborers, whom we see only too glad to serve anybody for hire, claiming a share in the kingly art.
Younger Socrates
Certainly not.
Stranger
But there are people who perform services of another kind, how about them?
Younger Socrates
What services and what men do you mean?
Stranger
The class of heralds and those who become by long practice skilled as clerks and other clever men who perform various services in connection with public offices.
What shall we call them?
Younger Socrates
What you called the others, servants; they are not themselves rulers in the states.
Stranger
But surely it was no dream that made me say we should find somewhere in this region those who more than others lay claim to the art of statesmanship;
and yet it would be utterly absurd to look for them in any servile position.
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
But let us draw a little closer still to those whom we have not yet examined.
There are men who have to do with divination and possess a portion of a certain menial science; for they are supposed to be interpreters of the gods to men.
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
And then, too, the priests, according to law and custom, know how to give the gods, by means of sacrifices, the gifts that please them from us and by prayers to ask for us the gain of good things from them; now these are both part of a servant's art.
Younger Socrates
At least they seem to be so.
Stranger
At last, then, I think we are, as it were, on the track of our quarry.
For the bearing of the priests and prophets is indeed full of pride, and they win high esteem because of the magnitude of their undertakings.
In Egypt, for example, no king can rule without being a priest, and if he happens to have forced his way to the throne from some other class, he must enroll himself in the class of priests afterwards; and among the Greeks, too, you would find that in many states the performance of the greatest public sacrifices is a duty imposed upon the highest officials.
Yes, among you Athenians this is very plain, for they say the holiest and most national of the ancient sacrifices are performed by the man whom the lot has chosen to be the King.
Younger Socrates
Yes, certainly.
Stranger
We must, then, examine these elected kings and priests and their assistants, and also another very large crowd of people which has just come in sight now that the others are out of the way.
Younger Socrates
Who are these people?
Stranger
A very queer lot.
Younger Socrates
How so?
Stranger
They are of very mixed race at least they seem so now, when I can just see them.
For many of them are like lions and centaurs and other fierce creatures, and very many are like satyrs and the weak and cunning beasts; and they make quick exchanges of forms and qualities with one another.
Ah, but now, Socrates, I think I have just made out who they are.
Younger Socrates
Tell me; for you seem to have caught sight of something strange.
Stranger
Yes, for ignorance makes things seem strange to everybody.
That was what happened to me just now; when I suddenly caught sight of them I did not recognize the troop of those who busy themselves with the affairs of the state.
Younger Socrates
What troop?
Stranger
That which of all the sophists is the greatest charlatan and most practised in charlatanry.
This, although it is a hard thing to do, must be separated from the band of really statesmanlike and kingly men, if we are to get a clear view of the object of our search.
Younger Socrates
But we certainly cannot give that up.
Stranger
No, of course not, I agree to that.
And now please answer a question.
Younger Socrates
What is it?
Stranger
We agree that monarchy is one of the forms of government, do we not?
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
And after monarchy one might, I should say, mention the rule of the few.
Younger Socrates
Yes, of course.
Stranger
And a third form of government is the rule of the multitude, called democracy, is it not?
Younger Socrates
Yes, certainly.
Stranger
Do not these three become after a fashion five, producing out of themselves two additional names?
Younger Socrates
What names?
Stranger
People nowadays are likely to take into consideration enforced subjection and voluntary obedience, poverty and wealth, law and lawlessness as they occur in governments, and so they divide two of the forms we mentioned, giving to the two aspects of monarchy the two names tyranny and royalty.
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
And the state that is ruled by the few is called, as the case may be, aristocracy or oligarchy.
Younger Socrates
To be sure.
Stranger
In the case of democracy, however, whether the multitude rule those who have property by violence or with their willing consent, and whether the laws are carefully observed or not, no one ever habitually changes the name.
Younger Socrates
True.
Stranger
Now then, do we believe that any of these forms of government which are defined by the distinctions between the one, the few, and the many, or wealth and poverty, or violence and willingness, or written constitution and absence of laws, is a right one?
Younger Socrates
I don't see why not.
Stranger
Look a bit more closely along the line I am going to point out.
Younger Socrates
What is it?
Stranger
Shall we abide by what we said in the beginning, or dissent from it?
Younger Socrates
To what do you refer?
Stranger
We said, I believe, that royal power was one of the sciences.
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
And not only a science, but we selected it from the rest as a science of judgement and command.
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
And from the science of command we distinguished one part which rules inanimate works, and one which rules living beings; and so we have gone on dividing in this manner to the present moment, never forgetting that it is a science, but as yet unable to state with sufficient accuracy what science it is.
Younger Socrates
You are right.
Stranger
Then is this our understanding, that the distinction between forms of government ought not to be found in the words few or many, or voluntary or unwilling, or wealth or poverty, but some science must be the distinguishing feature, if we are to be consistent with our previous statement?
Younger Socrates
Yes, indeed; it cannot be otherwise.
Stranger
Necessarily, then, our present duty is to inquire in which, if any, of these forms of government is engendered the science of ruling men, which is about the greatest of sciences and the most difficult to acquire.
We must discover that in order to see what men are to be distinguished from the wise king men, I mean, who pretend to be, and make many believe that they are, statesmen, but are really not such at all.
Younger Socrates
Yes, we must do this; that is implied in what was said before.
Stranger
Does it seem at all possible that a multitude in a state could acquire this science?
Younger Socrates
By no means.
Stranger
But in a state of one thousand men could perhaps a hundred or as many as fifty acquire it adequately?
Younger Socrates
No, in that case this would be the easiest of all the arts; for we know that a city of a thousand men could never produce that number of finished draught-players in comparison with those in other Greek cities, still less so many kings.
For the man who possesses the kingly science, whether he rule or not, must be called kingly, as our previous argument showed.
Stranger
You did well to remind me.
And in agreement with this, we must, I suppose, look for the right kind of rule in one or two or very few men, whenever such right rule occurs.
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
And these men, whether they rule over willing or unwilling subjects, with or without written laws, and whether they are rich or poor, must, according to our present opinion, be supposed to exercise their rule in accordance with some art or science.
And physicians offer a particularly good example of this point of view.
Whether they cure us against our will or with our will, by cutting us or burning us or causing us pain in any other way,
and whether they do it by written rules or without them, and whether they are rich or poor, we call them physicians just the same, so long as they exercise authority by art or science, purging us or reducing us in some other way, or even adding to our weight, provided only that they who treat their patients treat them for the benefit of their health and preserve them by making them better than they were.
In this way and no other, in my opinion, shall we determine this to be the only right definition of the rule of the physician or of any other rule whatsoever.
Younger Socrates
Very true.
Stranger
It is, then, a necessary consequence that among forms of government that one is preeminently right and is the only real government, in which the rulers are found to be truly possessed of science, not merely to seem to possess it, whether they rule by law or without law, whether their subjects are willing or unwilling, and whether they themselves are rich or poor none of these things can be at all taken into account on any right method.
Younger Socrates
Excellent.
Stranger
And whether they purge the state for its good by killing or banishing some of the citizens, or make it smaller by sending out colonies somewhere, as bees swarm from the hive, or bring in citizens from elsewhere to make it larger, so long as they act in accordance with science and justice and preserve and benefit it by making it better than it was, so far as is possible, that must at that time and by such characteristics be declared to be the only right form of government.
All other forms must be considered not as legitimate or really existent, but as imitating this; those states which are said to be well governed imitate it better, and the others worse.
Younger Socrates
Everything else that you have said seems reasonable; but that government should be carried on without laws is a hard saying.
Stranger
You got ahead of me a little with your question, Socrates; for I was just going to ask whether you accepted all I have said, or were displeased with anything.
But now it is clear that we shall have to discuss the question of the propriety of government without laws.
Younger Socrates
Of course we shall.
Stranger
In a sense, however, it is clear that law-making belongs to the science of kingship; but the best thing is not that the laws be in power, but that the man who is wise and of kingly nature be ruler.
Do you see why?
Younger Socrates
Why is it?
Stranger
Because law could never, by determining exactly what is noblest and must just for one and all, enjoin upon them that which is best; for the differences of men and of actions and the fact that nothing, I may say, in human life is ever at rest, forbid any science whatsoever to promulgate any simple rule for everything and for all time.
We agree to that, I suppose?
Younger Socrates
Yes, of course.
Stranger
But we see that law aims at pretty nearly this very thing, like a stubborn and ignorant man who allows no one to do anything contrary to his command, or even to ask a question, not even if something new occurs to some one, which is better than the rule he has himself ordained.
Younger Socrates
True; the law treats each and all of us exactly as you describe.
Stranger
So that which is persistently simple is inapplicable to things which are never simple?
Younger Socrates
I suppose so.
Stranger
Why in the world, then, is it necessary to make laws, since law is not the most perfect right?
We must ask the reason for this.
Younger Socrates
Yes, of course.
Stranger
Well, there are here at Athens, as in other cities, classes for practice in athletics to prepare for contests in running or the like, are there not?
Younger Socrates
Yes, a great many of them.
Stranger
Now let us recall to mind the orders given by the professional trainers when they are in charge of such classes.
Younger Socrates
What do you mean?
Stranger
They think they cannot go into details in individual cases and order what is best for each person's physique; they think they must employ a rougher method and give a general rule which will be good for the physique of the majority.
Younger Socrates
Good.
Stranger
And therefore they nowadays assign equal exercise to whole classes; they make them begin at the same time and stop at the same time, whether they run or wrestle or practise any other kind of bodily exercise.
Younger Socrates
That is true.
Stranger
And so we must believe that the law-maker who is to watch over the herds and maintain justice and the obligation of contracts, will never be able by making laws for all collectively, to provide exactly that which is proper for each individual.
Younger Socrates
Probably not, at any rate.
Stranger
But he will, I fancy, legislate for the majority and in a general way only roughly for individuals, whether he issues written laws or his enactments follow the unwritten traditional customs.
Younger Socrates
Quite right.
Stranger
Yes, quite right.
For how could anyone, Socrates, sit beside each person all his life and tell him exactly what is proper for him to do?
Certainly anyone who really possessed the kingly science, if he were able to do this, would hardly, I imagine, ever put obstacles in his own way by writing what we call laws.
Younger Socrates
No, at least not according to what has just been said.
Stranger
Or rather, my friend, not according to what is going to be said.
Younger Socrates
What is that?
Stranger
Something of this sort:
Let us suppose that a physician or a gymnastic trainer is going away and expects to be a long time absent from his patients or pupils; if he thinks they will not remember his instructions, he would want to write them down, would he not?
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
What if he should come back again after a briefer absence than he expected?
Would he not venture to substitute other rules for those written instructions if others happened to be better for his patients, because the winds or something else had, by act of God, changed unexpectedly from their usual course?
Would he persist in the opinion that no one must transgress the old laws, neither he himself by enacting new ones nor his patient by venturing to do anything contrary to the written rules, under the conviction that these laws were medicinal and healthful and anything else was unhealthful and unscientific?
If anything of that sort occurred in the realm of science and true art, would not any such regulations on any subject assuredly arouse the greatest ridicule?
Younger Socrates
Most assuredly.
Stranger
But he who has made written or unwritten laws about the just and unjust, the honorable and disgraceful, the good and the bad for the herds of men that are tended in their several cities in accordance with the laws of the law-makers, is not to be permitted to give other laws contrary to those, if the scientific law-maker, or another like him, should come!
Would not such a prohibition appear in truth as ridiculous as the other?
Younger Socrates
It certainly would.
Stranger
Do you know what people in general say about such a case?
Younger Socrates
I don't recall it just now off-hand.
Stranger
Yes, it is very plausible;
for they say that if anyone has anything better than the old laws to offer, he must first persuade the state, and then he may make his laws, but not otherwise.
Younger Socrates
And is that not right?
Stranger
Perhaps.
But suppose a man does not use persuasion, but makes an improvement by force.
What is this force to be called?
Answer me or, no, not yet; first answer in reference to what we were talking of before.
Younger Socrates
What do you mean?
Stranger
Suppose a physician who has right knowledge of his profession does not persuade, but forces, his patient, whether man, woman, or child, to do the better thing, though it be contrary to the written precepts, what will such violence be called?
The last name in the world to call it would be "unscientific and baneful error," as the phrase is, would it not?
And the patient so forced might rightly say anything else rather than that he had been treated in a baneful or unscientific way by the physicians who used force upon him.
Younger Socrates
Very true.
Stranger
But what can we call the unscientific error in the field of statesmanship?
Is it not baseness and evil and injustice?
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
Now if people are forced, contrary to the written laws and inherited traditions, to do what is juster and nobler and better than what they did before, tell me, will not anyone who blames such use of force, unless he is to be most utterly ridiculous, always say anything or everything rather than that those who have been so forced have suffered base and unjust and evil treatment at the hands of those who forced them?
Younger Socrates
Very true.
Stranger
But would the violence be just if he who uses it is rich, and unjust if he is poor?
Or if a man, whether rich or poor, by persuasion or by other means, in accordance with written laws or contrary to them, does what is for the good of the people, must not this be the truest criterion of right government, in accordance with which the wise and good man will govern the affairs of his subjects?
Just as the captain of a ship keeps watch for what is at any moment for the good of the vessel and the sailors, not by writing rules, but by making his science his law, and thus preserves his fellow voyagers, so may not a right government be established in the same way by men who could rule by this principle, making science more powerful than the laws?
And whatever the wise rulers do, they can commit no error, so long as they maintain one great principle and by always dispensing absolute justice to them with wisdom and science are able to preserve the citizens and make them better than they were, so far as that is possible.
Younger Socrates
There is no denying the truth of what you have just said.
Stranger
And those other statements cannot be denied, either.
Younger Socrates
What statements?
Stranger
That no great number of men, whoever they may be, could ever acquire political science and be able to administer a state with wisdom, but our one right form of government must be sought in some small number or one person, and all other forms are merely, as we said before, more or less successful imitations of that.
Younger Socrates
What do you mean by that?
I did not understand about the imitations a little while ago, either.
Stranger
And yet it is quite a serious matter if after stirring up this question we drop it and do not go on and show the error which is committed in relation to it nowadays.
Younger Socrates
What is the error?
Stranger
I will tell you what we must investigate; it is not at all familiar or easy to see, but let us try to grasp it nevertheless.
Tell me this: Assuming that the form of government we have described is the only right form, don't you see that the other forms must employ its written laws if they are to be preserved by doing that which is approved of nowadays, although it is not perfectly right?
Younger Socrates
What is not perfectly right?
Stranger
That no citizen shall dare to do anything contrary to the laws, and that he who does shall be punished by death and the most extreme penalties.
And this is perfectly right and good as a second choice, as soon as you depart from the first form of which we were just speaking.
Now let us tell in some detail how this which we called the second choice comes about.
Shall we do so?
Younger Socrates
By all means.
Stranger
Let us return once more to the images which we always have to use in portraying kingly rulers.
Younger Socrates
What images?
Stranger
The noble captain of a ship and the "physician who is worth as much as many others."
Let us make a simile of them and use it to help us to discover something.
Younger Socrates
What is your simile?
Stranger
Something of this sort:
Imagine that we all thought in regard to captains and physicians: "We are most abominably treated by them.
For whomsoever of us either of them wishes to save, he saves, one of them just like the other, and whomsoever he wishes to maltreat, he maltreats.
They cut us up and burn us and order us to bring them payments of money, as if they were exacting tribute, of which they spend little or nothing for their patients; they themselves and their servants use the rest.
And finally they are bribed by the patient's relatives or enemies and actually bring about his death.
And as for the captains, they commit countless other misdeeds they make plots and leave us deserted ashore when they put out to sea, they bring on mishaps at sea and so cast us into the water, and are guilty of other wrong-doings."
Now suppose, with these thoughts in mind, we deliberated about them and decided that we would no longer allow either of these arts to rule without control over slaves or free men,
but that we would call an assembly either of all the people or of the rich only, and that anyone, whether he were engaged in some other form of skilled labor or were without any special qualifications, should be free to offer an opinion about navigation and diseases, how drugs and surgical or medical instruments should be applied to the patients,
and how ships and nautical instruments should be used for navigation and in meeting dangers, not only those of winds and sea that affect the voyage itself, but also those met in encounters with pirates, and if battles have to be fought between ships of war; and that whatever the majority decided about these matters, whether any physicians or ship captains or merely unskilled persons took part in the deliberations, should be inscribed upon tablets and slabs or in some instances should be adopted as unwritten ancestral customs, and that henceforth forever navigation and the care of the sick should be conducted in accordance with these provisions.
Younger Socrates
That is a most absurd state of things that you have described.
Stranger
And suppose that rulers of the people are set up annually, whether from the rich or from the whole people, on the principle that whoever is chosen by lot should rule, and that these rulers exercise their authority in commanding the ships or treating the sick in accordance with the written rules.
Younger Socrates
That is still harder to imagine.
Stranger
Now consider what comes next.
When the year of office has passed for each set of rulers, there will have to be sessions of courts in which the judges are chosen by lot either from a selected list of the rich or from the whole people, and the rulers will have to be brought before these courts and examined as to their conduct in office, and anyone who pleases can bring against the captains an accusation for failure to command the ships during the year in accordance with the written laws or the ancestral customs,
and similarly against the physicians for their treatment of the sick;
and if any of them is found guilty, the court shall decide what his punishment or his fine shall be.
Younger Socrates
Surely anyone who consents voluntarily to hold office under such conditions would richly deserve any penalty or fine that might be imposed.
Stranger
And then, in addition to all this, there will have to be a law that if anyone is found to be investigating the art of pilotage or navigation or the subject of health and true medical doctrine about winds and things hot and cold, contrary to the written rules, or to be indulging in any speculation whatsoever on such matters, he shall in the first place not be called a physician or a ship captain, but a star-gazer, a kind of loquacious sophist, and secondly anyone who is properly qualified may bring an accusation against him and hale him into court for corrupting the young and persuading them to attack the arts of navigation and medicine in opposition to the laws and to govern the ships and the sick according to their own will; and if he is found to be so persuading either young or old contrary to the laws and written rules, he shall suffer the most extreme penalties.
Nothing, they say, ought to be wiser than the laws; for no one is ignorant of medicine and the laws of health or of the pilot's art and navigation, since anyone who pleases can learn the existing written rules and ancestral customs.
Now if these regulations which I speak of were to be applied to these sciences, Socrates, and to strategy and every part of the entire art of hunting and to painting or every kind of imitation and to carpentry including every kind of utensil-making, or even to husbandry and all the art that is concerned with plants, or if we were to see an art of horse-breeding conducted by written rules, or herdsmanship in general or prophecy or everything that is included in the art of serving, or draught-playing or the whole science of number, whether arithmetic or plane geometry or solid geometry or problems of motion what would you think of carrying on all these in such a way, by written rules and not by knowledge?
Younger Socrates
Clearly all the arts would be utterly ruined, nor could they ever rise again, through the operation of the law prohibiting investigation; and so life, which is hard enough now, would then become absolutely unendurable.
Stranger
Here is a further point.
If we ordained that each of the aforesaid arts must be carried on by written rules and that the observance of our written rules be under the charge of the man who is elected or chosen by lot, but he should disregard the written rules and for the sake of some gain or to do a favor to some one should try to act contrary to them, without possessing any knowledge, would not this be a greater evil than the former?
Younger Socrates
Most assuredly.
Stranger
Since the laws are made after long experience and after commissioners of some kind have carefully considered each detail with delicate skill and have persuaded the people to pass them, anyone, I fancy, who ventured to violate them would be involved in error many times greater than the first, and would cause even greater ruin than the written laws to all kinds of transactions.
Younger Socrates
Of course he would.
Stranger
Therefore the next best course for those who make laws or written rules about anything whatsoever is to prohibit any violation of them whatsoever, either by one person or by a greater number.
Younger Socrates
Right.
Stranger
These laws, then, written by men who know in so far as knowledge is possible, are imitations in each instance of some part of truth?
Younger Socrates
Of course.
Stranger
And yet we said, if we remember, that the man of knowledge, the real statesman, would by his art make many changes in his practice without regard to his writings, when he thought another course was better though it violated the rules he had written and sent to his absent subjects.
Younger Socrates
Yes, we did say that.
Stranger
But is it not true that any man or any number of men whatsoever who have written laws, if they undertake to make any change in those laws, thinking it is all improvement, are doing, to the best of their ability, the same thing which our true statesman does?
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
If, then, they were to do this without science, however, imitate badly in every case; but if they were scientific, then it would no longer be imitation, but the actual perfect reality of which we spoke?
Younger Socrates
Yes, assuredly.
Stranger
And yet we agreed definitely a while ago that no multitude is able to acquire any art whatsoever.
Younger Socrates
Yes, that is definitely agreed.
Stranger
Then if there is a kingly art, neither the collective body of the wealthy nor the whole people could ever acquire this science of statesmanship.
Younger Socrates
No; certainly not.
Stranger
Such states, then, it seems, if they are to imitate well, so far as possible, that true form of government by a single ruler who rules with science must never do anything in contravention of their existing written laws and ancestral customs.
Younger Socrates
You are quite right.
Stranger
Then whenever the rich imitate this government, we call such a state an aristocracy; and when they disregard the laws, we call it an oligarchy.
Younger Socrates
Yes, I think we do.
Stranger
And again, when one man rules according to laws and imitates the scientific ruler, we call him a king, making no distinction in name between the single ruler who rules by science and him who rules by opinion if they both rule in accordance with laws.
Younger Socrates
Yes, I think we do.
Stranger
Accordingly, if one man who is really scientific rules, he will assuredly be called by the same name, king, and by no other; and so the five names of what are now called the forms of government have become only one.
Younger Socrates
So it seems, at least.
Stranger
But when a single ruler acts in accordance with neither laws nor customs, but claims, in imitation of the scientific ruler, that whatever is best must be done, even though it be contrary to the written laws, and this imitation is inspired by desire and ignorance, is not such a ruler to be called in every instance a tyrant?
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
Thus, we say, the tyrant has arisen, and the king and oligarchy and aristocracy and democracy, because men are not contented with that one perfect ruler, and do not believe that there could ever be any one worthy of such power or willing and able by ruling with virtue and knowledge to dispense justice and equity rightly to all, but that he will harm and kill and injure any one of us whom he chooses on any occasion, since they admit that if such a man as we describe should really arise, he would be welcomed and would continue to dwell among them, directing to their weal as sole ruler a perfectly right form of government.
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
But, as the case now stands, since, as we claim, no king is produced in our states who is, like the ruler of the bees in their hives, by birth pre-eminently fitted from the beginning in body and mind, we are obliged, as it seems, to follow in the track of the perfect and true form of government by coming together and making written laws.
Younger Socrates
Yes, I suppose we are.
Stranger
Can we wonder, then, Socrates, at all the evils that arise and are destined to arise in such kinds of government, when they are based upon such a foundation, and must conduct their affairs in accordance with written laws and with customs, without knowledge?
For every one can see that any other art built upon such a foundation would ruin all its works that are so produced.
Ought we not rather to wonder at the stability that inheres in the state?
For states have labored under such conditions for countless ages, nevertheless some of them are lasting and are not overthrown.
Many, to be sure, like ships that founder at sea, are destroyed, have been destroyed, and will be destroyed hereafter, through the worthlessness of their captains and crews who have the greatest ignorance of the greatest things, men who have no knowledge of statesmanship, but think they have in every respect most perfect knowledge of this above all other sciences.
Younger Socrates
Very true.
Stranger
Is it, then, our duty to see which of these not right forms of government is the least difficult to live with, though all are difficult, and which is the most oppressive,
although this is somewhat aside from the subject we had proposed for ourselves?
On the whole, however, perhaps all of us have some such motive in mind in all that we are doing.
Younger Socrates
Yes, it is our duty, of course.
Stranger
Well then, you may say that of the three forms, the same is both the hardest and the easiest.
Younger Socrates
What do you mean?
Stranger
Just this: I mean that there are three forms of government, as we said at the beginning of the discussion which has now flowed in upon us monarchy, the rule of the few, and the rule of the many.
Younger Socrates
Yes, there were those three.
Stranger
Let us, then, by dividing each of these into two parts, make six, and by distinguishing the right government from these, a seventh.
Younger Socrates
How shall we make the division?
Stranger
We said that monarchy comprised royalty and tyranny, and the rule of the few comprised aristocracy, which has a name of good omen, and oligarchy; but to the rule of the many we gave then only a single name, democracy; now, however, that also must be divided.
Younger Socrates
How?
On what principle shall we divide that?
Stranger
On the same that we used for the others, though the name of this form is already twofold in meaning.
At any rate, the distinction between ruling according to law and without law applies alike to this and the rest.
Younger Socrates
Yes, it does.
Stranger
Before, when we were in search of the right government, this division was of no use, as we showed at the time but now that we have set that apart and have decided that the others are the only available forms of government, the principle of lawfulness and lawlessness bisects each of them.
Younger Socrates
So it seems, from what has been said.
Stranger
Monarchy, then, when bound by good written rules, which we call laws, is the best of all the six; but without law it is hard and most oppressive to live with.
Younger Socrates
I fancy it is.
Stranger
But just as few is intermediate between one and a multitude, so the government of the few must be considered intermediate, both in good and in evil.
But the government of the multitude is weak in all respects and able to do nothing great, either good or bad, when compared with the other forms of government, because in this the powers of government are distributed in small shares among many men;
therefore of all these governments when they are lawful, this is the worst, and when they are all lawless it is the best; and if they are all without restraint, life is most desirable in a democracy, but if they are orderly, that is the worst to live in; but life in the first kind of state is by far the first and best, with the exception of the seventh, for that must be set apart from all the others, as God is set apart from men.
Younger Socrates
That statement appears to be true to the facts, and we must do as you say.
Stranger
Then those who participate in all those governments with the exception of the scientific one are to be eliminated as not being statesmen, but partisans and since they preside over the greatest counterfeits, they are themselves counterfeits, and since they are the greatest of imitators and cheats, they are the greatest of all sophists.
Younger Socrates
This term "sophist" seems to have come round quite rightly to the so-called statesmen.
Stranger
Well, this part has been exactly like a play.
Just as we remarked a moment ago, a festive troop of centaurs or satyrs was coming into view, which we had to separate from the art of statesmanship; and now we have succeeded in doing this, though it has been very difficult.
Younger Socrates
So it seems.
Stranger
But another group remains, which is still more difficult to separate, because it is more closely akin to the kingly class and is also harder to recognize.
I think we are in somewhat the same position as refiners of gold.
Younger Socrates
How so?
Stranger
Why, the refiners first remove earth and stones and all that sort of thing; and after that there remain the precious substances which are mixed with the gold and akin to it and can be removed only by fire copper and silver and sometimes adamant.
These are removed by the difficult processes of smelting and tests, leaving before our eyes what is called unalloyed gold in all its purity.
Younger Socrates
Yes, that is said, at least, to be the process.
Stranger
By the same method I think all that is different and alien and incompatible has now been eliminated by us from the science of statesmanship, and what is precious and akin to it is left.
Herein are included the arts of the general and of the judge and that kind of oratory which partakes of the kingly art because it persuades men to justice and thereby helps to steer the ship of state.
Now in what way shall we most easily eliminate these and show him whom we seek alone by himself and undisguised?
Younger Socrates
Clearly we must do this somehow.
Stranger
Then if it is a question of trying, he will be shown.
But I think we had better try to disclose him by means of music.
Please answer my question.
Younger Socrates
What is it?
Stranger
Shall we agree that there is such a thing as learning music and the sciences of handicraft in general?
Younger Socrates
There is.
Stranger
And how shall we say that there is another science connected with those, which tells whether we ought or ought not to learn any one of then?
Younger Socrates
Yes, we shall say that there is.
Stranger
And shall we agree that this is different from those?
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
And shall we say that none of them ought to have control of any other, or that those sciences should control this one, or that this should control and rule all the others?
Younger Socrates
This should control those others.
Stranger
You mean that the science which decides whether we ought to learn or not should control the science which is learnt or teaches?
Younger Socrates
Emphatically.
Stranger
And the science which decides whether to persuade or not should control that which can persuade?
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
Well, then, to what science shall we assign the power of persuading a multitude or a mob by telling edifying stories, not by teaching?
Younger Socrates
It is, I think, clear that this must be added to rhetoric.
Stranger
But the power of deciding whether some action, no matter what, should be taken, either by persuasion or by some exercise of force, in relation to any person, or whether to take no action at all to what science is that to be assigned?
Younger Socrates
To the science which controls the sciences of persuasion and speech.
Stranger
And that would, I think, be no other than the function of the statesman.
Younger Socrates
A most excellent conclusion.
Stranger
So rhetoric also seems to have been quickly separated from statesmanship as a different species, subservient to the other.
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
Here is another function or power; what are we to think about it?
Younger Socrates
What is it?
Stranger
The power of determining how war shall be waged against those upon whom we have declared war, whether we are to call this a science or not a science?
Younger Socrates
How could we think it is not a science, when generalship and all military activity practise it?
Stranger
And the power which is able and knows how to deliberate and decide whether to make war or peace, shall we assume that it is the same as this or different?
Younger Socrates
If we are consistent, we must assume that it is different.
Stranger
Shall we, then, assume that it controls the other, if we are to agree with our views in the former examples?
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
And what other art shall we make bold to declare is mistress of that great and terrible art, the art of war as a whole, except the truly kingly art?
Younger Socrates
No other.
Stranger
We shall, then, not call the art of the generals statesmanship, since it is subservient.
Younger Socrates
No; that would not be reasonable.
Stranger
Now let us examine the function of the righteous judges.
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
Has it any power beyond that of judging men's contracts with one another, pronouncing them right or wrong by the standard of the existing laws which it has received from the king and law-giver; showing its own peculiar virtue in that it is not so perverted by any bribes, or fears, or pity, or enmity, or friendship, as ever to consent to decide the lawsuits of men with each other contrary to the enactments of the lawgiver?
Younger Socrates
No; the business of this power is about as you have described it.
Stranger
Then we find that the strength of judges is not kingly, but is guardian of laws and a servant of the kingly power.
Younger Socrates
So it appears.
Stranger
The consideration of all these arts which have been mentioned leads to the conclusion that none of them is the art of the statesman.
For the art that is truly kingly ought not to act itself, but should rule over the arts that have the power of action; it should decide upon the right or wrong time for the initiation of the most important measures in the state, and the other arts should perform its behests.
Younger Socrates
Right.
Stranger
Therefore those arts which we have just described, as they control neither one another nor themselves, but have each its own peculiar sphere of action, are quite properly called by special names corresponding to those special actions.
Younger Socrates
That appears, at least, to be the case.
Stranger
But the art which holds sway over them all and watches over the laws and all things in the state, weaving them all most perfectly together, we may, I think, by giving to its function a designation which indicates its power over the community, with full propriety call "statecraft."
Younger Socrates
Most assuredly.
Stranger
Shall we then proceed to discuss it after the model supplied by weaving, now that all the classes in the state have been made plain to us?
Younger Socrates
By all means.
Stranger
Then the kingly process of weaving must be described, its nature, the manner in which it combines the threads, and the kind of web it produces.
Younger Socrates
Evidently.
Stranger
It has, apparently, become necessary, after all, to explain a difficult matter.
Younger Socrates
But certainly the explanation must be made.
Stranger
It is difficult, for the assertion that one part of virtue is in a way at variance with another sort of virtue may very easily be assailed by those who appeal to popular opinion in contentious arguments.
Younger Socrates
I do not understand.
Stranger
I will say it again in another way.
I suppose you believe that courage is one part of virtue.
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
And, of course, that self-restraint is different from courage, but is also a part of virtue of which courage is a part.
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
Now I must venture to utter a strange doctrine about them.
Younger Socrates
What is it?
Stranger
That, in a way, they are in a condition of great hostility and opposition to each other in many beings.
Younger Socrates
What do you mean?
Stranger
Something quite unusual; for, you know, all the parts of virtue are usually said to be friendly to one another.
Younger Socrates
Yes.
Stranger
Now shall we pay careful attention and see whether this is so simple, or, quite the contrary, there is in some respects a variance between them and their kin?
Younger Socrates
Yes; please tell how we shall investigate the question.
Stranger
Among all the parts we must look for those which we call excellent but place in two opposite classes.
Younger Socrates
Say more clearly what you mean.
Stranger
Acuteness and quickness, whether in body or soul or vocal utterance, whether they are real or exist in such likenesses as music and graphic art produce in imitation of them have you never yourself praised one of them or heard them praised by others?
Younger Socrates
Yes, of course.
Stranger
And do you remember in what way they praise them as occasion offers?
Younger Socrates
Not in the least.
Stranger
I wonder if I can express to you in words what I have in mind.
Younger Socrates
Why not?
Stranger
You seem to think that is an easy thing to do.
However, let us consider the matter as it appears in the opposite classes.
For example, when we admire, as we frequently do in many actions, quickness and energy and acuteness of mind or body or even of voice, we express our praise of them by one word, courage.
Younger Socrates
How so?
Stranger
We say acute and courageous in the first instance, also quick and courageous, and energetic and courageous; and when we apply this word as a common term applicable to all persons and actions of this class, we praise them.
Younger Socrates
Yes, we do.
Stranger
But do we not also praise the gentle type of movement in many actions?
Younger Socrates
We do, decidedly.
Stranger
And in doing so, do we not say the opposite of what we said about the other class?
Younger Socrates
How is that?
Stranger
We are always saying "How quiet!" and "How restrained!" when we are admiring the workings of the mind, and again we speak of actions as slow and gentle, of the voice as smooth and deep, and of every rhythmic motion and of music in general as having appropriate slowness; and we apply to them all the term which signifies, not courage, but decorum.
Younger Socrates
Very true.
Stranger
And again, on the other hand, when these two classes seem to us out of place, we change our attitude and blame them each in turn; then we use the terms in the opposite sense.
Younger Socrates
How is that?
Stranger
Why, whatsoever is sharper than the occasion warrants, or seems to be too quick or too hard, is called violent or mad, and whatever is too heavy or slow or gentle, is called cowardly and sluggish; and almost always we find that the restraint of one class of qualities and the courage of the opposite class, like two parties arrayed in hostility to each other, do not mix with each other in the actions that are concerned with such qualities.
Moreover, if we pursue the inquiry, we shall see that the men who have these qualities in their souls are at variance with one another.
Younger Socrates
In what do you mean that they are at variance?
Stranger
In all those points which we just mentioned, and probably in many others.
For men who are akin to each class, I imagine, praise some qualities as their own and find fault with those of their opposites as alien to themselves, and thus great enmity arises between them on many grounds.
Younger Socrates
Yes, that is likely to be the case.
Stranger
Now this opposition of these two classes is mere child's play but when it affects the most important matters it becomes a most detestable disease in the state.
Younger Socrates
What matters does it affect?
Stranger
The whole course of life, in all probability.
For those who are especially decorous are ready to live always a quiet and retired life and to mind their own business; this is the manner of their intercourse with every one at home, and they are equally ready at all times to keep peace in some way or other with foreign states.
And because of this desire of theirs, which is often inopportune and excessive, when they have their own way they quite unconsciously become unwarlike, and they make the young men unwarlike also; they are at the mercy of aggressors; and thus in a few years they and their children and the whole state often pass by imperceptible degrees from freedom to slavery.
Younger Socrates
That is a hard and terrible experience.
Stranger
But how about those who incline towards courage?
Do they not constantly urge their countries to war, because of their excessive desire for a warlike life?
Do they not involve them in hostilities with many powerful opponents and either utterly destroy their native lands or enslave and subject them to their foes?
Younger Socrates
Yes, that is true, too.
Stranger
Then in these examples how can we deny that these two classes are always filled with the greatest hostility and opposition to one another?
Younger Socrates
We certainly cannot deny it.
Stranger
Have we not, then, found just what we had in view in the beginning, that important parts of virtue are by nature at variance with one another and also that the persons who possess them exhibit the same opposition?
Younger Socrates
Yes, I suppose that is true.
Stranger
Let us then take up another question.
Younger Socrates
What question?
Stranger
Whether any constructive science voluntarily composes any, even the most worthless, of its works out of good and bad materials, or every science invariably rejects the bad, so far as possible, taking only the materials which are good and fitting, out of which, whether they be like or unlike, it gathers all elements together and produces one form or value.
Younger Socrates
The latter, of course.
Stranger
Then neither will the true natural art of statecraft ever voluntarily compose a state of good and bad men; but obviously it will first test them in play, and after the test will entrust them in turn to those who are able to teach and help them to attain the end in view; it will itself give orders and exercise supervision, just as the art of weaving constantly commands and supervises the carders and others who prepare the materials for its web, directing each person to do the tasks which it thinks are requisite for its fabric.
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
In the same way I think the kingly art, keeping for itself the function of supervision, will not allow the duly appointed teachers and foster fathers to give any training, unless they can thereby produce characters suitable to the constitution it is creating, but in these things only it exhorts them to give instruction.
And those men who have no capacity for courage and self-restraint and the other qualities which tend towards virtue, but by the force of an evil nature are carried away into godlessness, violence, and injustice, it removes by inflicting upon them the punishments of death and exile and deprivation of the most important civic rights.
Younger Socrates
That is about what people say, at any rate.
Stranger
And those in turn who wallow in ignorance and craven humility it places under the yoke of slavery.
Younger Socrates
Quite right.
Stranger
As for the rest of the people, those whose natures are capable, if they get education, of being made into something fine and noble and of uniting with each other as art requires,
the kingly art takes those natures which tend more towards courage, considering that their character is sturdier, like the warp in weaving, and those which incline towards decorum, for these, to continue the simile, are spun thick and soft like the threads of the woof, and tries to combine these natures of opposite tendencies and weave them together in the following manner.
Younger Socrates
In what manner?
Stranger
First it binds the eternal part of their souls with a divine bond, to which that part is akin, and after the divine it binds the animal part of them with human bonds.
Younger Socrates
Again I ask What do you mean?
Stranger
I mean that really true and assured opinion about honor, justice, goodness and their opposites is divine, and when it arises in men's souls, it arises in a godlike race.
Younger Socrates
That would be fitting, at any rate.
Stranger
Do we not know, then, that the statesman and good lawgiver is the only one to whom the power properly belongs, by the inspiration of the kingly art, to implant this true opinion in those who have rightly received education, those of whom we were just now speaking?
Younger Socrates
Well, probably.
Stranger
And let us never, Socrates, call him who has not such power by the names we are now examining.
Younger Socrates
Quite right.
Stranger
Now is not a courageous soul, when it lays hold upon such truth, made gentle, and would it not then be most ready to partake of justice?
And without it, does it not incline more towards brutality?
Younger Socrates
Yes, of course.
Stranger
And again if the decorous nature partakes of these opinions,
does it not become truly self-restrained and wise, so far as the state is concerned, and if it lacks participation in such qualities, does it not very justly receive the shameful epithet of simpleton?
Younger Socrates
Certainly.
Stranger
Then can we say that such interweaving and binding together of the bad with the bad or of the good with the bad ever becomes enduring, or that any science would ever seriously make use of it in uniting such persons?
Younger Socrates
Of course not.
Stranger
But we may say that in those only who were of noble nature from their birth and have been nurtured as befits such natures it is implanted by the laws, and for them this is the medicine prescribed by science, and, as we said before, this bond which unites unlike and divergent parts of virtue is more divine.
Younger Socrates
Very true.
Stranger
The remaining bonds, moreover, being human, are not very difficult to devise or, after one has devised them, to create, when once this divine bond exists.
Younger Socrates
How so? And what are they?
Stranger
Those made between states concerning intermarriages and the sharing of children by adoption, and those relating to portionings and marriages within the state.
For most people make such bonds without proper regard to the procreation of children.
Younger Socrates
How is that?
Stranger
The pursuit of wealth or power in connection with matrimony but why should anyone ever take the trouble to blame it, as though it were worth arguing about?
Younger Socrates
There is no reason for doing so.
Stranger
We have better cause, however, to speak our minds about those whose chief care is the family, in case their conduct is not what it should be.
Younger Socrates
Yes; very likely.
Stranger
The fact is, they act on no right theory at all; they seek their ease for the moment; welcoming gladly those who are like themselves, and finding those who are unlike them unendurable, they give the greatest weight to their feeling of dislike.
Younger Socrates
How so?
Stranger
The decorous people seek for characters like their own; so far as they can they marry wives of that sort and in turn give their daughters in marriage to men of that sort; and the courageous do the same, eagerly seeking natures of their own kind, whereas both classes ought to do quite the opposite.
Younger Socrates
How so, and why?
Stranger
Because in the nature of things courage, if propagated through many generations with no admixture of a self-restrained nature, though at first it is strong and flourishing, in the end blossoms forth in utter madness.
Younger Socrates
That is likely.
Stranger
But the soul, on the other hand, that is too full of modesty and contains no alloy of courage or boldness, after many generations of the same kind becomes too sluggish and finally is utterly crippled.
Younger Socrates
That also is likely to happen.
Stranger
It was these bonds, then, that I said there was no difficulty in creating, provided that both classes have one and the same opinion about the honorable and the good.
For indeed the whole business of the kingly weaving is comprised in this and this alone, in never allowing the self-restrained characters to be separated from the courageous, but in weaving them together by common beliefs and honors and dishonors and opinions and interchanges of pledges, thus making of them a smooth and, as we say, well-woven fabric, and then entrusting to them in common for ever the offices of the state.
Younger Socrates
How is that to be done?
Stranger
When one official is needed, by choosing a president who possesses both qualities; and when a hoard is desired, by combining men of each class.
For the characters of self-restrained officials are exceedingly careful and just and conservative, but they lack keenness and a certain quick and active boldness.
Younger Socrates
That also seems, at least, to be true.
Stranger
The courageous natures, on the other hand, are deficient in justice and caution in comparison with the former, but excel in boldness of action;
and unless both these qualities are present it is impossible for a state to be entirely prosperous in public and private matters.
Younger Socrates
Yes, certainly.
Stranger
This, then, is the end, let us declare, of the web of the statesman's activity, the direct interweaving of the characters of restrained and courageous men, when the kingly science has drawn them together by friendship and community of sentiment into a common life,
and having perfected the most glorious and the best of all textures, clothes with it all the inhabitants of the state, both slaves and freemen, holds them together by this fabric, and omitting nothing which ought to belong to a happy state, rules and watches over them.
Younger Socrates
You have given us, Stranger, a most complete and admirable treatment of the king and the statesman.
Protagoras
A Friend
Socrates
Friend
Where have you been now, Socrates?
Ah, but of course you have been in chase of Alcibiades and his youthful beauty!
Well, only the other day, as I looked at him, I thought him still handsome as a man for a man he is, Socrates, between you and me, and with quite a growth of beard.
Socrates
And what of that?
Do you mean to say you do not approve of Homer, who said that youth has highest grace in him whose beard is appearing, as now in the case of Alcibiades?
Friend
Then how is the affair at present?
Have you been with him just now?
And how is the young man treating you?
Socrates
Quite well, I considered, and especially so today: for he spoke a good deal on my side, supporting me in a discussion in fact I have only just left him.
However, there is a strange thing I have to tell you: although he was present, I not merely paid him no attention, but at times forgot him altogether.
Friend
Why, what can have happened between you and him?
For surely you did not find anyone else of greater beauty there, no, not in our city.
Socrates
Yes, of far greater.
Friend
What do you say?
One of our people, or a foreigner?
Socrates
A foreigner.
Friend
Of what city?
Socrates
Abdera.
Friend
And you found this foreigner so beautiful that he appeared to you of greater beauty than the son of Cleinias?
Socrates
Why, my good sir, must not the wisest appear more beautiful?
Friend
Do you mean it was some wise man that you met just now?
Socrates
Nay, rather the wisest of our generation, I may tell you, if "wisest" is what you agree to call Protagoras.
Friend
Ah, what a piece of news!
Protagoras come to town!
Socrates
Yes, two days ago.
Friend
And it was his company that you left just now?
Socrates
Yes, and a great deal I said to him, and he to me.
Friend
Then do let us hear your account of the conversation at once, if you are disengaged take my boy's place, and sit here.
Socrates
Very good indeed, I shall be obliged to you, if you will listen.
Friend
And we also to you, I assure you, if you will tell us.
Socrates
A twofold obligation.
Well now, listen.
During this night just past, in the small hours, Hippocrates, son of Apollodorus and brother of Phason, knocked violently at my door with his stick, and when they opened to him he came hurrying in at once and calling to me in a loud voice:
Socrates, are you awake, or sleeping?
Then I, recognizing his voice,
said: Hippocrates, hello: some news to break to me?
Only good news, he replied.
Tell it, and welcome, I said: what is it, and what business brings you here at such an hour?
Protagoras has come, he said, standing at my side.
Yes, two days ago, I said: have you only just heard?
Yes, by Heaven!
he replied, last evening.
With this he groped about for the bedstead, and sitting down by my feet he said: It was in the evening, after I had got in very late from Oenoe.
My boy Satyrus, you see, had run away: I meant to let you know I was going in chase of him, but some other matter put it out of my head.
On my return, when we had finished dinner and were about to retire, my brother told me, only then, that Protagoras had come.
I made an effort, even at that hour, to get to you at once, but came to the conclusion that it was too late at night.
But as soon as I had slept off my fatigue I got up at once and made my way straight here.
Then I, noting the man's gallant spirit and the flutter he was in, remarked: Well, what is that to you?
Has Protagoras wronged you?
At this he laughed and, Yes, by the gods!
he said, Socrates, by being the only wise man, and not making me one.
But, by Zeus!
I said, if you give him a fee and win him over he will make you wise too.
Would to Zeus and all the gods, he exclaimed, only that were needed!
I should not spare either my own pocket or those of my friends.
But it is on this very account I have come to you now, to see if you will have a talk with him on my behalf:
for one thing, I am too young to do it myself; and for another, I have never yet seen Protagoras nor heard him speak a word I was but a child when he paid us his previous visit.
You know, Socrates, how everyone praises the man and tells of his mastery of speech: let us step over to him at once, to make sure of finding him in;
he is staying, so I was told, with Callias, son of Hipponicus.
Now, let us be going.
To this I replied: We had better not go there yet, my good friend, it is so very early: let us rise and turn into the court here, and spend the time strolling there till daylight comes; after that we can go.
Protagoras, you see, spends most of his time indoors, so have no fear, we shall find him in all right, most likely.
So then we got up and strolled in the court; and I, to test Hippocrates' grit, began examining him with a few questions.
Tell me, Hippocrates, I said, in your present design of going to Protagoras and paying him money as a fee for his services to yourself, to whom do you consider you are resorting, and what is it that you are to become?
Suppose, for example, you had taken it into your head to call on your namesake Hippocrates of Cos, the Asclepiad, and pay him money as your personal fee, and suppose someone asked you
Tell me, Hippocrates, in purposing to pay a fee to Hippocrates, what do you consider him to be?
How would you answer that?
A doctor, I would say.
And what would you intend to become?
A doctor, he replied.
And suppose you had a mind to approach Polycleitus the Argive or Pheidias the Athenian and pay them a personal fee, and somebody asked you What is it that you consider Polycleitus or Pheidias to be, that you are minded to pay them this money?
What would your answer be to that?
Sculptors, I would reply.
And what would you intend to become?
Obviously, a sculptor.
Very well then, I said;
you and I will go now to Protagoras, prepared to pay him money as your fee,from our own means if they are adequate for the purpose of prevailing on him, but if not, then drawing on our friends' resources to make up the sum.
Now if anyone, observing our extreme earnestness in the matter, should ask us,
Pray, Socrates and Hippocrates, what is it that you take Protagoras to be, when you purpose to pay him money?
What should we reply to him?
What is the other name that we commonly hear attached to Protagoras?
They call Pheidias a sculptor and Homer a poet: what title do they give Protagoras?
A sophist, to be sure, Socrates, is what they call him.
Then we go to him and pay him the money as a sophist?
Certainly.
Now suppose someone asked you this further question: And what is it that you yourself hope to become when you go to Protagoras ?
To this he replied with a blush for by then there was a glimmer of daylight by which I could see him quite clearly If it is like the previous cases, obviously, to become a sophist.
In Heaven's name, I said, would you not be ashamed to present yourself before the Greeks as a sophist?
Yes, on my soul I should, Socrates, if I am to speak my real thoughts.
Yet after all, Hippocrates, perhaps it is not this sort of learning that you expect to get from Protagoras, but rather the sort you had from your language-master, your harp-teacher, and your sports-instructor;
for when you took your lessons from each of these it was not in the technical way, with a view to becoming a professional, but for education, as befits a private gentleman.
I quite agree, he said it is rather this kind of learning that one gets from Protagoras.
Then are you aware what you are now about to do, or is it not clear to you?
I asked.
To what do you refer?
I mean your intention of submitting your soul to the treatment of a man who, as you say, is a sophist; and as to what a sophist really is, I shall be surprised if you can tell me.
And yet, if you are ignorant of this, you cannot know to whom you are entrusting your soul, whether it is to something good or to something evil.
I really think, he said, that I know.
Then tell me, please, what you consider a sophist to be.
I should say, he replied, from what the name implies, that he is one who has knowledge of wise matters.
Well, I went on, we are able to say this of painters also, and of carpenters, that they are the persons who have knowledge of wise matters; and if someone asked us for what those matters are wise, of which painters have knowledge, I suppose we should tell him that they are wise for the production of likenesses, and similarly with the rest.
But if he should ask for what the matters of the sophist are wise, how should we answer him?
What sort of workmanship is he master of?
How should we describe him, Socrates, as a master of making one a clever speaker?
Perhaps, I replied, we should be speaking the truth, but yet not all the truth; for our answer still calls for a question, as to the subject on which the sophist makes one a clever speaker: just as the harp player makes one clever, I presume, at speaking on the matter of which he gives one knowledge, namely harp-playing, you agree to that?
Yes.
Well, about what does the sophist make one a clever speaker?
Clearly it must be the same thing as that of which he gives one knowledge.
So it would seem:
now what is this thing, of which the sophist himself has knowledge and gives knowledge to his pupil?
Ah, there, in good faith, he said, I fail to find you an answer.
I then went on to say:
Now tell me, are you aware upon what sort of hazard you are going to stake your soul?
If you had to entrust your body to someone, taking the risk of its being made better or worse, you would first consider most carefully whether you ought to entrust it or not, and would seek the advice of your friends and relations and ponder it for a number of days:
but in the case of your soul, which you value much more highly than your body, and on which depends the good or ill condition of all your affairs, according as it is made better or worse, would you omit to consult first with either your father or your brother or one of us your comrades,
as to whether or no you should entrust your very soul to this newly-arrived foreigner;
but choose rather, having heard of him in the evening, as you say, and coming to me at dawn, to make no mention of this question, and take no counsel upon it whether you ought to entrust yourself to him or not;
and are ready to spend your own substance and that of your friends, in the settled conviction that at all costs you must converse with Protagoras, whom you neither know, as you tell me, nor have ever met in argument before, and whom you call "sophist," in patent ignorance of what this sophist may be to whom you are about to entrust yourself?
When he heard this he said: It seems so, Socrates, by what you say.
Then can it be, Hippocrates, that the sophist is really a sort of merchant or dealer in provisions on which a soul is nourished?
For such is the view I take of him.
With what, Socrates, is a soul nourished?
With doctrines, presumably, I replied.
And we must take care, my good friend, that the sophist, in commending his wares, does not deceive us, as both merchant and dealer do in the case of our bodily food.
For among the provisions, you know, in which these men deal, not only are they themselves ignorant what is good or bad for the body, since in selling they commend them all, but the people who buy from them are so too, unless one happens to be a trainer or a doctor.
And in the same way, those who take their doctrines the round of our cities, hawking them about to any odd purchaser who desires them, commend everything that they sell, and there may well be some of these too, my good sir, who are ignorant which of their wares is good or bad for the soul; and in just the same case are the people who buy from them, unless one happens to have a doctor's knowledge here also, but of the soul.
So then, if you are well informed as to what is good or bad among these wares, it will be safe for you to buy doctrines from Protagoras or from anyone else you please: but if not, take care, my dear fellow, that you do not risk your greatest treasure on a toss of the dice.
For I tell you there is far more serious risk in the purchase of doctrines than in that of eatables.
When you buy victuals and liquors you can carry them off from the dealer or merchant in separate vessels, and before you take them into your body by drinking or eating you can lay them in your house and take the advice of an expert whom you can call in, as to what is fit to eat or drink and what is not, and how much you should take and when; so that in this purchase the risk is not serious.
But you cannot carry away doctrines in a separate vessel: you are compelled, when you have handed over the price, to take the doctrine in your very soul by learning it, and so to depart either an injured or a benefited man.
These, then, are questions which we have to consider with the aid of our elders, since we ourselves are still rather young to unravel so great a matter.
For the moment, however, let us pursue our design and go and hear this person; and when we have heard him we shall proceed to consult others: for Protagoras is not the only one there; we shall find Hippias of Elis and, I believe, Prodicus of Ceos, and numerous other men of wisdom besides.
This we resolved on, and set forth; and when we arrived at the doorway, we stood discussing some question or other that had occurred to us by the way: so, not to leave it unfinished, but to get it settled before we went in, we stood there and discussed in front of the door, until we had come to an agreement with each other.
Now, I fancy the doorkeeper, who was a eunuch, overheard us;
very likely the great number of sophists has made him annoyed with callers at the house: at any rate,
when we had knocked on the door, he opened it and, on seeing us,
Hello, he said, sophists there!
Master is engaged.
So saying, he seized the door with both hands and very smartly clapped it to with all his might.
We tried knocking again, and then he spoke in answer through the closed door,
Sirs, have you not heard, he is engaged?
But, my good fellow, I said, we have not come to see Callias, nor are we sophists.
Have no fear: I tell you, we have come to ask if we may see Protagoras; so go and announce us.
Then with much hesitation the fellow opened the door to us
and when we had entered, we came upon Protagoras as he was walking round in the cloister, and close behind him two companies were walking round also;
on the one side Callias, son of Hipponicus and his brother on the mother's side, Paralus, son of Pericles, and Charmides, son of Glaucon, while the other troop consisted of Pericles' other son Xanthippus, Philippides, son of Philomelus, and Antimoerus of Mende, who is the most highly reputed of Protagoras' disciples and is taking the course professionally with a view to becoming a sophist.
The persons who followed in their rear, listening to what they could of the talk, seemed to be mostly strangers, brought by the great Protagoras from the several cities which he traverses, enchanting them with his voice like Orpheus, while they follow where the voice sounds, enchanted; and some of our own inhabitants were also dancing attendance.
As for me, when I saw their evolutions I was delighted with the admirable care they took not to hinder Protagoras at any moment by getting in front; but whenever the master turned about and those with him, it was fine to see the orderly manner in which his train of listeners split up into two parties on this side and on that, and wheeling round formed up again each time in his rear most admirably.
"And next did I mark,"
as Homer says, Hippias of Elis, seated high on a chair in the doorway opposite; and sitting around him on benches were Eryximachus, son of Acumenus, Phaedrus of Myrrhinous, Andron son of Androtion and a number of strangers, fellow-citizens of Hippias and some others.
They seemed to be asking him a series of astronomical questions on nature and the heavenly bodies, while he, seated in his chair, was distinguishing and expounding to each in turn the subjects of their questions.
"Nay more, Tantalus also did I there behold."
for you know Prodicus of Ceos is in Athens too: he was in a certain apartment formerly used by Hipponieus as a strong-room, but now cleared out by Callias to make more space for his numerous visitors, and turned into a guest-chamber.
Well, Prodicus was still abed, wrapped up in sundry fleeces and rugs, and plenty of them too, it seemed; and near him on the beds hard by lay Pausanias from Cerames, and with Pausanias a lad who was still quite young, of good birth and breeding, I should say, and at all events a very good-looking person.
I fancied I heard his name was Agathon, and I should not be surprised to find he is Pausanias' favorite.
Besides this youth there were the two Adeimantuses, sons of Cepis and Leucolophidas, and there seemed to be some others.
The subjects of their conversation I was unable to gather from outside, despite my longing to hear Prodicus; for I regard the man as all-wise and divine: but owing to the depth of his voice the room was filled with a booming sound which made the talk indistinct.
We had only just come in, when close on our heels entered Alcibiades the good-looking, as you call him and I agree that he is, and Critias, son of Callaeschrus.
So, when we had entered, after some more little delays over certain points we had to examine, we went up to Protagoras, and I said: Protagoras, you see we have come to you, Hippocrates and I.
Is it your wish, he asked, to converse with me alone, or in company with others?
It is all the same to us, I replied: let me first tell you our object in coming, and then you must decide.
Well, what is your object? he asked.
My friend Hippocrates is a native of the city, a son of Apollodorus and one of a great and prosperous family, while his own natural powers seem to make him a match for anyone of his age.
I fancy he is anxious to gain consideration in our city, and he believes he can best gain it by consorting with you.
So now it is for you to judge whether it will be fittest for you to converse on this matter privately with us alone, or in company with others.
You do right, Socrates, he said, to he so thoughtful on my behalf.
For when one goes as a stranger into great cities, and there tries to persuade the best of the young men to drop their other connexions, either with their own folk or with foreigners, both old and young, and to join one's own circle, with the promise of improving them by this connexion with oneself, such a proceeding requires great caution; since very considerable jealousies are apt to ensue, and numerous enmities and intrigues.
Now I tell you that sophistry is an ancient art, and those men of ancient times who practised it, fearing the odium it involved, disguised it in a decent dress, sometimes of poetry, as in the case of Homer, Hesiod, and Simonides sometimes of mystic rites and soothsayings, as did Orpheus, Musaeus and their sects; and sometimes too, I have observed, of athletics, as with Iccus of Tarentum and another still living as great a sophist as any Herodicus of Selymbria, originally of Megara; and music was the disguise employed by your own Agathocles, a great sophist, Pythocleides of Ceos, and many more.
All these, as I say, from fear of ill-will made use of these arts as outer coverings.
But I do not conform to the method of all these persons, since I believe they did not accomplish any of their designs:
for the purpose of all this disguise could not escape the able men of affairs in each city; the multitude, of course, perceive practically nothing, but merely echo this or that pronouncement of their leaders.
Now to try to run away, and to fail through being caught in the act, shows sad folly in the mere attempt, and must needs make people far more hostile;
for they regard such an one, whatever else he may be, as a rogue.
Hence the road I have taken is one entirely opposite to theirs: I admit that I am a sophist and that I educate men; and I consider this precaution, of admitting rather than denying, the better of the two.
There are others besides that I have meditated, so as to avoid, under Heaven, any harm that may come of admitting that I am a sophist.
And yet many long years have I now been in the profession, for many in total number are those that I have lived: not one of you all, but in age I might be his father.
Hence it suits me by far the best, in meeting your wishes, to make my discourse on these matters in the presence of all who are in the house.
On this, as I suspected that he wished to make a display before Prodicus and Hippias, and give himself airs on the personal attachment shown by our coming to him, I remarked: Then surely we must call Prodicus and Hippias and their followers to come and listen to us
By all means, said Protagoras.
Then do you agree, said Callias, to our making a session of it, so that we may sit at ease for our conversation?
The proposal was accepted; and all of us, delighted at the prospect of listening to wise men, took hold of the benches and couches ourselves and arranged them where Hippias was, since the benches were there already.
Meanwhile Callias and Alcibiades came, bringing with them Prodicus, whom they had induced to rise from his couch, and Prodicus' circle also.
When we had all taken our seats, So now, Socrates, said Protagoras, since these gentlemen are also present, be so good as to tell what you were mentioning to me a little while before on the young man's behalf.
To which I replied: The same point, Protagoras, will serve me for a beginning as a moment ago, in regard to the object of my visit.
My friend Hippocrates finds himself desirous of joining your classes; and therefore he says he would be glad to know what result he will get from joining them.
That is all the speech we have to make.
Then Protagoras answered at once, saying: Young man, you will gain this by coming to my classes, that on the day when you join them you will go home a better man, and on the day after it will be the same; every day you will constantly improve more and more.
When I heard this I said:
Protagoras, what you say is not at all surprising, but quite likely, since even you, though so old and so wise, would be made better if someone taught you what you happen not to know.
But let me put it another way: suppose Hippocrates here should change his desire all at once, and become desirous of this young fellow's lessons who has just recently come to town,
Zeuxippus of Heraclea, and should approach him, as he now does you, and should hear the very same thing from him as from you,
how on each day that he spent with him he would be better and make constant progress; and suppose he were to question him on this and ask:
In what shall I become better as you say, and to what will my progress be?
Zeuxippus's reply would be, to painting.
Then suppose he came to the lessons of Orthagoras the Theban, and heard the same thing from him as from you, and then inquired of him for what he would be better each day through attending his classes, the answer would be, for fluting.
In the same way you also must satisfy this youth and me on this point, and tell us for what, Protagoras, and in what connexion my friend Hippocrates, on any day of attendance at the classes of Protagoras, will go away a better man, and on each of the succeeding days will make a like advance.
When Protagoras heard my words, You do right, he said, to ask that, while I am only too glad to answer those who ask the right question.
For Hippocrates, if he comes to me, will not be treated as he would have been if he had joined the classes of an ordinary sophist.
The generality of them maltreat the young; for when they have escaped from the arts they bring them back against their will and force them into arts, teaching them arithmetic and astronomy and geometry and music (and here he glanced at Hippias); whereas, if he applies to me, he will learn precisely and solely that for which he has come.
That learning consists of good judgement in his own affairs, showing how best to order his own home; and in the affairs of his city, showing how he may have most influence on public affairs both in speech and in action.
I wonder, I said, whether I follow what you are saying;
for you appear to be speaking of the civic science, and undertaking to make men good citizens.
That, Socrates, he replied, is exactly the purport of what I profess.
Then it is a goodly accomplishment that you have acquired, to be sure, I remarked, if indeed you have acquired it to such a man as you I may say sincerely what I think.
For this is a thing, Protagoras, that I did not suppose to be teachable; but when you say it is, I do not see how I am to disbelieve it.
How I came to think that it cannot be taught, or provided by men for men, I may be allowed to explain.
I say, in common with the rest of the Greeks, that the Athenians are wise.
Now I observe, when we are collected for the Assembly, and the city has to deal with an affair of building, we send for builders to advise us on what is proposed to be built;
and when it is a case of laying down a ship, we send for shipwrights;
and so in all other matters which are considered learnable and teachable:
but if anyone else, whom the people do not regard as a craftsman, attempts to advise them, no matter how handsome and wealthy and well-born he may be, not one of these things induces them to accept him; they merely laugh him to scorn and shout him down, until either the speaker retires from his attempt, overborne by the clamor, or the tipstaves pull him from his place or turn him out altogether by order of the chair.
Such is their procedure in matters which they consider professional.
But when they have to deliberate on something connected with the administration of the State, the man who rises to advise them on this may equally well be a smith, a shoemaker, a merchant, a sea-captain, a rich man, a poor man, of good family or of none,
and nobody thinks of casting in his teeth, as one would in the former case, that his attempt to give advice is justified by no instruction obtained in any quarter, no guidance of any master; and obviously it is because they hold that here the thing cannot be taught.
Nay further, it is not only so with the service of the State, but in private life our best and wisest citizens are unable to transmit this excellence of theirs to others;
for Pericles, the father of these young fellows here, gave them a first-rate training in the subjects for which he found teachers, but in those of which he is himself a master he neither trains them personally nor commits them to another's guidance, and so they go about grazing at will like sacred oxen, on the chance of their picking up excellence here or there for themselves.
Or, if you like, there is Cleinias, the younger brother of Alcibiades here, whom this same Pericles, acting as his guardian, and fearing lie might be corrupted, I suppose, by Alcibiades, carried off from his brother and placed in Ariphron's family to be educated: but before six months had passed he handed him back to Alcibiades, at a loss what to do with him.
And there are a great many others whom I could mention to you as having never succeeded, though virtuous themselves, in making anyone else better, either of their own or of other families.
I therefore, Protagoras, in view of these facts, believe that virtue is not teachable: but when I hear you speak thus, I am swayed over, and suppose there is something in what you say, because I consider you to have gained experience in many things and to have learnt many, besides finding out some for yourself.
So if you can demonstrate to us more explicitly that virtue is teachable, do not grudge us your demonstration.
No, Socrates, I will not grudge it you; but shall I, as an old man speaking to his juniors, put my demonstration in the form of a fable, or of a regular exposition?
Many of the company sitting by him instantly bade him treat his subject whichever way he pleased.
Well then, he said, I fancy the more agreeable way is for me to tell you a fable.
There was once a time when there were gods, but no mortal creatures.
And when to these also came their destined time to be created, the gods moulded their forms within the earth, of a mixture made of earth and fire and all substances that are compounded with fire and earth.
When they were about to bring these creatures to light, they charged Prometheus and Epimetheus to deal to each the equipment of his proper faculty.
Epimetheus besought Prometheus that he might do the dealing himself; "And when I have dealt," he said, "you shall examine."
Having thus persuaded him he dealt; and in dealing he attached strength without speed; to some, while the weaker he equipped with speed; and some he armed, while devising for others, along with an unarmed condition, some different faculty for preservation.
To those which he invested with smallness he dealt a winged escape or an underground habitation; those which he increased in largeness he preserved by this very means; and he dealt all the other properties on this plan of compensation.
In contriving all this he was taking precaution that no kind should be extinguished;
and when he had equipped them with avoidances of mutual destruction, he devised a provision against the seasons ordained by Heaven, in clothing them about with thick-set hair and solid hides, sufficient to ward off winter yet able to shield them also from the heats, and so that on going to their lairs they might find in these same things a bedding of their own that was native to each; and some he shod with hoofs, others with claws and solid, bloodless hides.
Then he proceeded to furnish each of them with its proper food, some with pasture of the earth, others with fruits of trees, and others again with roots; and to a certain number for food he gave other creatures to devour: to some he attached a paucity in breeding, and to others, which were being consumed by these, a plenteous brood, and so procured survival of their kind.
Now Epimetheus, being not so wise as he might be, heedlessly squandered his stock of properties on the brutes; he still had left unequipped the race of men, and was at a loss what to do with it.
As he was casting about, Prometheus arrived to examine his distribution, and saw that whereas the other creatures were fully and suitably provided, man was naked, unshod, unbedded, unarmed; and already the destined day was come, whereon man like the rest should emerge from earth to light.
Then Prometheus, in his perplexity as to what preservation he could devise for man, stole from Hephaestus and Athena wisdom in the arts ogether with fire since by no means without fire could it be acquired or helpfully used by any and he handed it there and then as a gift to man.
Now although man acquired in this way the wisdom of daily life, civic wisdom he had not, since this was in the possession of Zeus;
Prometheus could not make so free as to enter the citadel which is the dwelling-place of Zeus, and moreover the guards of Zeus were terrible: but he entered unobserved the building shared by Athena and Hephaestus for the pursuit of their arts, and stealing Hephaestus's fiery art and all Athena's also he gave them to man, and hence it is that man gets facility for his livelihood, but Prometheus, through Epimetheus' fault, later on (the story goes) stood his trial for theft.
And now that man was partaker of a divine portion, he, in the first place, by his nearness of kin to deity, was the only creature that worshipped gods, and set himself to establish altars and holy images; and secondly, he soon was enabled by his skill to articulate speech and words, and to invent dwellings, clothes, sandals, beds, and the foods that are of the earth.
Thus far provided, men dwelt separately in the beginning, and cities there were none;
so that they were being destroyed by the wild beasts, since these were in all ways stronger than they; and although their skill in handiwork was a sufficient aid in respect of food, in their warfare with the beasts it was defective;
for as yet they had no civic art, which includes the art of war.
So they sought to band themselves together and secure their lives by founding cities.
Now as often as they were banded together they did wrong to one another through the lack of civic art, and thus they began to be scattered again and to perish.
So Zeus, fearing that our race was in danger of utter destruction, sent Hermes to bring respect and right among men, to the end that there should be regulation of cities and friendly ties to draw them together.
Then Hermes asked Zeus in what manner then was he to give men right and respect: "Am I to deal them out as the arts have been dealt?
That dealing was done in such wise that one man possessing medical art is able to treat many ordinary men, and so with the other craftsmen.
Am I to place among men right and respect in this way also, or deal them out to all?"
"To all," replied Zeus; "let all have their share: for cities cannot be formed if only a few have a share of these as of other arts.
And make thereto a law of my ordaining, that he who cannot partake of respect and right shall die the death as a public pest."
Hence it comes about, Socrates, that people in cities, and especially in Athens,
consider it the concern of a few to advise on cases of artistic excellence or good craftsmanship, and if anyone outside the few gives advice they disallow it, as you say, and not without reason, as I think: but when they meet for a consultation on civic art, where they should be guided throughout by justice and good sense, they naturally allow advice from everybody, since it is held that everyone should partake of this excellence, or else that states cannot be.
This, Socrates, is the explanation of it.
And that you may not think you are mistaken, to show how all men verily believe that everyone partakes of justice and the rest of civic virtue, I can offer yet a further proof.
In all other excellences, as you say, when a man professes to be good at flute-playing or any other art in which he has no such skill, they either laugh him to scorn or are annoyed with him, and his people come and reprove him for being so mad:
but where justice or any other civic virtue is involved, and they happen to know that a certain person is unjust, if he confesses the truth about his conduct before the public, that truthfulness which in the former arts they would regard as good sense they here call madness.
Everyone, they say, should profess to be just, whether he is so or not, and whoever does not make some pretension to justice is mad; since it is held that all without exception must needs partake of it in some way or other, or else not be of human kind.
Take my word for it, then, that they have good reason for admitting everybody as adviser on this virtue, owing to their belief that everyone has some of it;
and next, that they do not regard it as natural or spontaneous, but as something taught and acquired after careful preparation by those who acquire it, of this I will now endeavor to convince you.
In all cases of evils which men deem to have befallen their neighbors by nature or fortune, nobody is wroth with them or reproves or lectures or punishes them, when so afflicted, with a view to their being other than they are; one merely pities them.
Who, for instance, is such a fool as to try to do anything of the sort to the ugly, the puny, or the weak?
Because, I presume, men know that it is by nature and fortune that people get these things, the graces of life and their opposites.
But as to all the good things that people are supposed to get by application and practice and teaching, where these are lacking in anyone and only their opposite evils are found, here surely are the occasions for wrath and punishment and reproof.
One of them is injustice, and impiety, and in short all that is opposed to civic virtue; in such case anyone will be wroth with his neighbor and reprove him, clearly because the virtue is to be acquired by application and learning.
For if you will consider punishment, Socrates, and what control it has over wrong-doers, the facts will inform you that men agree in regarding virtue as procured.
No one punishes a wrong-doer from the mere contemplation or on account of his wrong-doing, unless one takes unreasoning vengeance like a wild beast.
But he who undertakes to punish with reason does not avenge himself for the past offence, since he cannot make what was done as though it had not come to pass; he looks rather to the future, and aims at preventing that particular person and others who see him punished from doing wrong again.
And being so minded he must have in mind that virtue comes by training: for you observe that he punishes to deter.
This then is the accepted view of all who seek requital in either private or public life; and while men in general exact requital and punishment from those whom they suppose to have wronged them, this is especially the case with the Athenians, your fellow-citizens, so that by our argument the Athenians also share the view that virtue is procured and taught.
Thus I have shown that your fellow-citizens have good reason for admitting a smith's or cobbler's counsel in public affairs, and that they hold virtue to be taught and procured: of this I have given you satisfactory demonstration, Socrates, as it appears to me.
I have yet to deal with your remaining problem about good men, why it is that these good men have their sons taught the subjects in the regular teachers' courses, and so far make them wise, but do not make them excel in that virtue wherein consists their own goodness.
On this point, Socrates, I shall give you argument instead of fable.
Now consider:
is there, or is there not, some one thing whereof all the citizens must needs partake, if there is to be a city?
Here, and nowhere if not here, is the solution of this problem of yours.
For if there is such a thing, and that one thing, instead of being the joiner's or smith's or potter's art, is rather justice and temperance and holiness in short, what I may put together and call a man's virtue;
and if it is this whereof all should partake and wherewith everyone should proceed to any further knowledge or action, but should not if he lacks it;
if we should instruct and punish such as do not partake of it, whether child or husband or wife, until the punishment of such persons has made them better, and should cast forth from our cities or put to death as incurable whoever fails to respond to such punishment and instruction; if it is like this, and yet, its nature being so, good men have their sons instructed in everything else but this, what very surprising folk the good are found to be!
For we have proved that they regard this thing as teachable both in private and in public life,
and then, though it may be taught and fostered, are we to say that they have their sons taught everything in which the penalty for ignorance is not death, but in a matter where the death-penalty or exile awaits their children if not instructed and cultivated in virtue and not merely death, but confiscation of property and practically the entire subversion of their house here they do not have them taught or take the utmost care of them?
So at any rate we must conclude, Socrates.
They teach and admonish them from earliest childhood till the last day of their lives.
As soon as one of them grasps what is said to him, the nurse, the mother, the tutor, and the father himself strive hard that the child may excel, and as each act and word occurs they teach and impress upon him that this is just, and that unjust, one thing noble, another base, one holy, another unholy, and that he is to do this, and not do that.
If he readily obeys, so;
but if not, they treat him as a bent and twisted piece of wood and straighten him with threats and blows.
After this they send them to school and charge the master to take far more pains over their children's good behavior than over their letters and harp-playing.
The masters take pains accordingly, and the children, when they have learnt their letters and are getting to understand the written word as before they did only the spoken, are furnished with works of good poets to read as they sit in class, and are made to learn them off by heart: here they meet with many admonitions, many descriptions and praises and eulogies of good men in times past, that the boy in envy may imitate them and yearn to become even as they.
Then also the music-masters, in a similar sort, take pains for their self-restraint, and see that their young charges do not go wrong:
moreover, when they learn to play the harp, they are taught the works of another set of good poets, the song-makers, while the master accompanies them on the harp; and they insist on familiarizing the boys' souls with the rhythms and scales, that they may gain in gentleness, and by advancing in rhythmic and harmonic grace may be efficient in speech and action; for the whole of man's life requires the graces of rhythm and harmony.
Again, over and above all this, people send their sons to a trainer, that having improved their bodies they may perform the orders of their minds, which are now in fit condition, and that they may not be forced by bodily faults to play the coward in wars and other duties.
This is what people do, who are most able;
and the most able are the wealthiest.
Their sons begin school at the earliest age, and are freed from it at the latest.
And when they are released from their schooling the city next compels them to learn the laws and to live according to them as after a pattern, that their conduct may not be swayed by their own light fancies,
but just as writing-masters first draw letters in faint outline with the pen for their less advanced pupils, and then give them the copy-book and make them write according to the guidance of their lines, so the city sketches out for them the laws devised by good lawgivers of yore, and constrains them to govern and be governed according to these.
She punishes anyone who steps outside these borders, and this punishment among you and in many other cities, from the corrective purpose of the prosecution, is called a Correction.
Seeing then that so much care is taken in the matter of both private and public virtue, do you wonder, Socrates, and make it a great difficulty, that virtue may be taught?
Surely there is no reason to wonder at that: you would have far greater reason, if it were not so.
Then why is it that many sons of good fathers turn out so meanly?
Let me explain this also:
it is no wonder, granted that I was right in stating just now that no one, if we are to have a city, must be a mere layman in this affair of virtue.
For if what I say is the case and it is supremely true reflect on the nature of any other pursuit or study that you choose to mention.
Suppose that there could be no state unless we were all flute-players, in such sort as each was able, and suppose that everyone were giving his neighbor both private and public lessons in the art, and rebuked him too, if he failed to do it well, without grudging him the trouble even as no one now thinks of grudging or reserving his skill in what is just and lawful as he does in other expert knowledge;
for our neighbors' justice and virtue, I take it, is to our advantage, and consequently we all tell and teach one another what is just and lawful
well, if we made the same zealous and ungrudging efforts to instruct each other in flute-playing, do you think, Socrates, that the good flute-players would be more likely than the bad to have sons who were good flute-players?
I do not think they would: no, wherever the son had happened to be born with a nature most apt for flute-playing, he would be found to have advanced to distinction, and where unapt, to obscurity.
Often the son of a good player would turn out a bad one, and often of a bad, a good.
But, at any rate, all would be capable players as compared with ordinary persons who had no inkling of the art.
Likewise in the present case you must regard any man who appears to you the most unjust person ever reared among human laws and society as a just man and a craftsman of justice, if he had to stand comparison with people who lacked education and law courts and laws and any constant compulsion to the pursuit of virtue,
but were a kind of wild folk such as Pherecrates the poet brought on the scene at last year's Lenaeum.
Sure enough, if you found yourself among such people, as did the misanthropes among his chorus, you would be very glad to meet with Eurybatus and Phrynondas, and would bewail yourself with longing for the wickedness of the people here.
Instead of that you give yourself dainty airs, Socrates, because everyone is a teacher of virtue to the extent of his powers, and you think there is no teacher.
Why, you might as well ask who is a teacher of Greek; you would find none anywhere; \
and I suppose you might ask, who can teach the sons of our artisans the very crafts which of course they have learnt from their fathers, as far as the father was competent in each case, and his friends who followed the same trade,
I say if you asked who is to give these further instruction, I imagine it would be hard, Socrates, to find them a teacher, but easy enough in the case of those starting with no skill at all.
And so it must be with virtue and everything else;
if there is somebody who excels us ever so little in showing the way to virtue, we must be thankful.
Such an one I take myself to be, excelling all other men in the gift of assisting people to become good and true, and giving full value for the fee that I charge nay, so much more than full, that the learner himself admits it.
For this reason I have arranged my charges on a particular plan: when anyone has had lessons from me, if he likes he pays the sum that I ask; if not, he goes to a temple, states on oath the value he sets on what he has learnt, and disburses that amount.
So now, Socrates, I have shown you by both fable and argument that virtue is teachable and is so deemed by the Athenians, and that it is no wonder that bad sons are born of good fathers and good of bad, since even the sons of Polycleitus, companions of Paralus and Xanthippus here, are not to be compared with their father, and the same is the case in other craftsmen's families.
As for these two, it is not fair to make this complaint of them yet;
there is still hope in their case, for they are young.
After this great and fine performance Protagoras ceased from speaking.
As for me, for a good while I was still under his spell and kept on looking at him as though he were going to say more, such was my eagerness to hear: but when I perceived that he had really come to a stop, I pulled myself together, as it were, with an effort, and looking at Hippocrates I said: Son of Apollodorus, I am very grateful to you for inducing me to come hither; for it is a great treat to have heard what I have heard from Protagoras.
I used formerly to think that there was no human treatment by which the good were made good, but now I am convinced that there is.
Only I find one slight difficulty, which Protagoras will of course easily explain away, since he has explained so many puzzles already.
If one should be present when any of the public speakers were dealing with these same subjects, one could probably hear similar discourses from Pericles or some other able speaker:
but suppose you put a question to one of them they are just like books, incapable of either answering you or putting a question of their own; if you question even a small point in what has been said, just as brazen vessels ring a long time after they have been struck and prolong the note unless you put your hand on them, these orators too, on being asked a little question, extend their speech over a full-length course.
But Protagoras here, while able to deliver, as events have shown, a long and excellent speech, is also able when questioned to reply briefly, and after asking a question to await and accept the answer accomplishments that few can claim.
And now, Protagoras, there is one little thing wanting to the completeness of what I have got, so please answer me this.
You say that virtue may be taught, and if there is anybody in the world who could convince me, you are the man: but there was a point in your speech at which I wondered, and on which my spirit would fain be satisfied.
You said that Zeus had sent justice and respect to mankind, and furthermore it was frequently stated in your discourse that justice, temperance, holiness and the rest were all but one single thing, virtue: pray, now proceed to deal with these in more precise exposition, stating whether virtue is a single thing, of which justice and temperance and holiness are parts, or whether the qualities I have just mentioned are all names of the same single thing.
This is what I am still hankering after.
Why, the answer to that is easy, Socrates, he replied: it is that virtue is a single thing and the qualities in question are parts of it.
Do you mean parts, I asked, in the sense of the parts of a face, as mouth, nose, eyes, and ears; or, as in the parts of gold, is there no difference among the pieces, either between the parts or between a part and the whole, except in greatness and smallness?
In the former sense, I think, Socrates; as the parts of the face are to the whole face.
Well then, I continued, when men partake of these portions of virtue, do some have one, and some another, or if you get one, must you have them all?
By no means, he replied, since many are brave but unjust, and many again are just but not wise.
Then are these also parts of virtue, I asked wisdom and courage?
Most certainly, I should say, he replied and of the parts, wisdom is the greatest.
Each of them, I proceeded, is distinct from any other?
Yes.
Does each also have its particular function?
Just as, in the parts of the face, the eye is not like the ears, nor is its function the same; nor is any of the other parts like another, in its function or in any other respect: in the same way, are the parts of virtue unlike each other, both in themselves and in their functions?
Are they not evidently so, if the analogy holds?
Yes, they are so, Socrates, he said.
So then, I went on, among the parts of virtue, no other part is like knowledge, or like justice, or like courage, or like temperance, or like holiness.
He agreed.
Come now, I said, let us consider together what sort of thing is each of these parts.
First let us ask, is justice something, or not a thing at all?
I think it is; what do you say?
So do I, he replied.
Well then, suppose someone should ask you and me: Protagoras and Socrates, pray tell me this the thing you named just now, justice, is that itself just or unjust?
I should reply, it is just: what would your verdict be?
The same as mine or different?
The same, he said.
Then justice, I should say in reply to our questioner, is of a kind that is just: would you also?
Yes, he said.
Now suppose he proceeded to ask us: Do you also speak of a "holiness"?
We should say we do, I fancy.
Yes, he said.
Then do you call this a thing also?
We should say we do, should we not?
He assented again.
Do you say this thing itself is of such nature as to be unholy, or holy?
For my part I should be annoyed at this question, I said, and should answer: Hush, my good sir!
It is hard to see how anything could be holy, if holiness itself is not to be holy!
And you would you not make the same reply?
Certainly I would, he said.
Now suppose he went on to ask us:
Well, and what of your statement a little while since?
Perhaps I did not hear you alright,
but I understood you two to say that the parts of virtue are in such a relation to each other that one of them is not like another.
Here my answer would be: As to the substance of it, you heard aright, but you made a mistake in thinking that I had any share in that statement.
It was Protagoras here who made that answer; I was only the questioner.
Then suppose he were to ask: Is our friend telling the truth, Protagoras?
Is it you who say that one part of virtue is not like another?
Is this statement yours?
What answer would you give him?
I must needs admit it, Socrates, he said.
Well now, Protagoras, after that admission, what answer shall we give him, if he goes on to ask this question: Is not holiness something of such nature as to be just, and justice such as to be holy, or can it be unholy?
Can holiness be not just, and therefore unjust, and justice unholy?
What is to be our reply?
I should say myself, on my own behalf, that both justice is holy and holiness just, and with your permission I would make this same reply for you also; since justness is either the same thing as holiness or extremely like it, and above all, justice is of the same kind as holiness, and holiness as justice.
Are you minded to forbid this answer, or are you in agreement with it?
I do not take quite so simple a view of it, Socrates, as to grant that justice is holy and holiness just.
I think we have to make a distinction here.
Yet what difference does it make?
he said: if you like, let us assume that justice is holy and holiness just.
No, no, I said; I do not want this "if you like" or "if you agree" sort of thing to be put to the proof, but you and me together; and when I say "you and me" I mean that our statement will be most properly tested if we take away the "if."
Well, at any rate, he said, justice has some resemblance to holiness; for anything in the world has some sort of resemblance to any other thing.
Thus there is a point in which white resembles black, and hard soft, and so with all the other things which are regarded as most opposed to each other; and the things which we spoke of before as having different faculties and not being of the same kind as each other the parts of the face these in some sense resemble one another and are of like sort.
In this way therefore you could prove, if you chose, that even these things are all like one another.
But it is not fair to describe things as like which have some point alike, however small, or ash unlike that have some point unlike.
This surprised me, and I said to him: What, do you regard just and holy as so related to each other that they have only some small point of likeness?
Not so, he replied, at all, nor yet, on the other hand, as I believe you regard them.
Well then, I said, since I find you chafe at this suggestion, we will let it pass, and consider another instance that you gave.
Is there a thing you call folly?
Yes, he said.
Is not the direct opposite to that thing wisdom?
I think so, he said.
And when men behave rightly and usefully, do you consider them temperate in so behaving, or the opposite?
Temperate, he said.
Then is it by temperance that they are temperate?
Necessarily.
Now those who do not behave rightly behave foolishly, and are not temperate in so behaving?
I agree, he said.
And behaving foolishly is the opposite to behaving temperately?
Yes, he said.
Now foolish behavior is due to folly, and temperate behavior to temperance?
He assented.
And whatever is done by strength is done strongly, and whatever by weakness, weakly?
He agreed.
And whatever with swiftness, swiftly, and whatever with slowness, slowly ?
he said.
And so whatever is done in a certain way is done by that kind of faculty, and whatever in an opposite way, by the opposite kind?
He agreed.
Pray now, I proceeded, is there such a thing as the beautiful?
He granted it.
Has this any opposite except the ugly?
None.
Well, is there such a thing as the good?
There is.
Has it any opposite but the evil?
None.
Tell me, is there such a thing as "shrill" in the voice?
he said.
Has it any other opposite than "deep."
No, he said.
Now, I went on, each single opposite has but one opposite, not many?
He admitted this.
Come now, I said, let us reckon up our points of agreement.
We have agreed that one thing has but one opposite, and no more?
We have.
And that what is done in an opposite way is done by opposites?
Yes, he said.
And we have agreed that what is done foolishly is done in an opposite way to what is done temperately?
Yes, he said.
And that what is done temperately is done by temperance, and what foolishly by folly?
He assented.
Now if it is done in an opposite way, it must be done by an opposite?
Yes?
And one is done by temperance, and the other by folly?
Yes.
In an opposite way?
Certainly.
And by opposite faculties?
Yes.
Then folly is opposite to temperance
Apparently.
Now do you recollect that in the previous stage we have agreed that folly is opposite to wisdom?
He admitted this.
And that one thing has but one opposite?
I say.
Then which, Protagoras, of our propositions are we to reject?
the statement that one thing has but one opposite; or the other, that wisdom is different from temperance, and each is a part of virtue, and moreover, a different part, and that the two are as unlike, both in themselves and in their faculties, as the parts of the face?
Which are we to upset?
The two of them together are not quite in tune;
they do not chime in harmony.
How could they, if one thing must needs have but one opposite and no more, while wisdom, and temperance likewise, appear both to be opposite to folly, which is a single thing?
Such is the position, Protagoras, I said or is it otherwise?
He admitted it was so, much against his will.
Then temperance and wisdom must be one thing?
And indeed we found before that justice and holiness were almost the same thing.
Come, Protagoras, I said, let us not falter, but carry out our inquiry to the end.
Tell me, does a man who acts unjustly seem to you to be temperate in so acting?
I should be ashamed, Socrates, he replied, to admit that, in spite of what many people say.
Then shall I address my argument to them, I asked, or to you?
If you please, he answered, debate first against that popular theory.
It is all the same to me, I said, so long as you make answer, whether it be your own opinion or not.
For although my first object is to test the argument, the result perhaps will be that both I, the questioner, and my respondent are brought to the test.
At first Protagoras appeared to be coy, alleging that the argument was too disconcerting: however he consented at length to make answer.
Well now, I said, begin at the beginning, and tell me,
do you consider people to be temperate when they are unjust?
Let us suppose so, he said.
And by being temperate you mean being sensible?
Yes.
And being sensible is being well-advised in their injustice?
Let us grant it, he said.
Does this mean, I asked, if they fare well by their injustice, or if they fare ill?
If they fare well.
Now do you say there are things that are good?
I do.
Then, I asked, are those things good which are profitable to men?
Oh yes, to be sure, he replied, and also when they are not profitable to men I call them good.
Here Protagoras seemed to me to be in a thoroughly provoked and harassed state, and to have set his face against answering: so when I saw him in this mood I grew wary and went gently with my questions.
Do you mean, Protagoras, I asked, things that are profitable to no human being, or things not profitable in any way at all?
Can you call such things as these good?
By no means, he replied; but I know a number of things that are unprofitable to men, namely, foods, drinks, drugs, and countless others, and some that are profitable;
some that are neither one nor the other to men, but are one or the other to horses;
and some that are profitable only to cattle, or again to dogs; some also that are not profitable to any of those, but are to trees;
and some that are good for the roots of a tree, but bad for its shoots such as dung, which is a good thing when applied to the roots of all plants, whereas if you chose to cast it on the young twigs and branches, it will ruin all.
And oil too is utterly bad for all plants, and most deadly for the hair of all animals save that of man, while to the hair of man it is helpful, as also to the rest of his body.
The good is such an elusive and diverse thing that in this instance it is good for the outward parts of man's body, but at the same time as bad as can be for the inward; and for this reason all doctors forbid the sick to take oil, except the smallest possible quantity, in what one is going to eat just enough to quench the loathing that arises in the sensations of one's nostrils from food and its dressings.
When he had thus spoken, the company acclaimed it as an excellent answer; and then I remarked: Protagoras, I find I am a forgetful sort of person, and if someone addresses me at any length I forget the subject on which he is talking.
So, just as you, in entering on a discussion with me, would think fit to speak louder to me than to others if I happened to be hard of hearing, please bear in mind now that you have to deal with a forgetful person, and therefore cut up your answers into shorter pieces, that I may be able to follow you.
Well, what do you mean by short answers?
he asked: do you want me to make them shorter than they should be?
Not at all, I said.
As long as they should be?
he asked.
Yes, I said.
Then are my answers to be as long as I think they should be, or as you think they should be?
Well, for instance, I have heard, I said, that you yourself are able, in treating one and the same subject, not only to instruct another person in it but to speak on it at length, if you choose, without ever being at a loss for matter; or again briefly, so as to yield to no one in brevity of expression.
So, if you are going to argue with me, employ with me the latter method, that of brevity.
Socrates, he said, I have undertaken in my time many contests of speech, and if I were to do what you demand, and argue just in the way that my opponent demanded, I should not be held superior to anyone nor would Protagoras have made a name among the Greeks.
Then, as I saw that he had not been quite satisfied with himself in making his former answers, and that he would not readily accept the part of answerer in debate, I considered it was not my business to attend his meetings further, and remarked: But you know, Protagoras, I too feel uncomfortable about our having this discussion against your inclination; but when you agree to argue in such a way that I can follow, then I will argue with you.
For you as people relate of you, and you yourself assert are able to hold a discussion in the form of either long or short speeches; you are a man of knowledge: but I have no ability for these long speeches, though I could wish that I had it.
Surely you, who are proficient in both ways, ought to have made us this concession, that so we might have had our debate.
But now that you refuse, and I am somewhat pressed for time and could not stay to hear you expatiate at any length for I have an appointment I will be off; though I daresay I should be happy enough to hear your views.
With these words I rose as if to go away; but, as I was getting up, Callias laid hold of my arm with his right hand, and grasped this cloak of mine with his left, and said: We will not let you go, Socrates; for if you leave us our discussions will not go so well.
I beg you therefore to stay with us, for there is nothing I would rather hear than an argument between you and Protagoras.
Come, you must oblige us all.
Then I said (I was now standing up as though to go out):
Son of Hipponicus, I always admire your love of knowledge, but especially do I commend and love it now, so that I should be very glad to oblige you if you asked of me something that I could do:
but I am afraid it is as though you asked me to keep pace with Criso the runner of Himera in his prime, or to keep up in a match with one of the long-distance or day-course racers, and I could only tell you that I wish that of myself, without your asking, I could keep pace with such runners, but of course I cannot.
If you want to have the spectacle of Criso and me running together, you must ask him to adapt his pace; for whereas I cannot run fast, he can run slowly.
So if you desire to hear Protagoras and me, ask him to resume the method of answering which he used at first in short sentences and keeping to the point raised.
Otherwise what is to be our mode of discussion?
For I thought that to hold a joint discussion and to make a harangue were two distinct things.
Ah, but you see,
Socrates, he said, Protagoras thinks it only fair to claim that he be allowed to discuss in his chosen style, in return for your claim that it should be in yours.
At this Alcibiades intervened, saying: You do not state it quite philosophically, Callias, for Socrates here confesses he is no hand at long discourses, and yields therein to Protagoras; but I should be surprised if he yields to any man in ability to argue, or in understanding the interchange of reason.
Now if Protagoras confesses himself inferior to Socrates in argumentation, Socrates has no more to ask: but if he challenges him, let him discuss by question and answer; not spinning out a lecture on each question beating off the arguments, refusing to give a reason, and so dilating until most of his hearers have forgotten the point at issue.
For Socrates, I warrant you, will not forget, despite his jesting way of calling himself forgetful.
Now I think Socrates' proposal is the more equitable for each of us should declare his personal opinion.
After Alcibiades, the next, I believe, to speak was Critias: Prodicus and Hippias, he said, it seems to me that Callias is all for supporting Protagoras, while Alcibiades is always for a contest in anything he takes up.
It is not for us to contend on either side for Socrates or for Protagoras, but jointly to request them both not to break off our conference unconcluded.
When he had said this, Prodicus remarked: I think you are right, Critias: those who attend this sort of discussion ought to be joint, but not equal, hearers of both disputants.
For there is a difference: we should listen jointly to them both, yet not give equal heed to each, but more to the wiser and less to the less intelligent.
I on my part also, Protagoras and Socrates, call upon you to accede to our request, and to dispute, but not wrangle, with each other over your arguments: for friends dispute with friends, just from good feeling; whereas wrangling is between those who are at variance and enmity with one another.
In this way our meeting will have highest success, since you the speakers will thus earn the greatest measure of good repute, not praise, from us who hear you.
For good repute is present in the hearers' souls without deception, but praise is too often in the words of liars who hide what they really think.
Again, we listeners would thus be most comforted, not pleased; for he is comforted who learns something and gets a share of good sense in his mind alone, whereas he is pleased who eats something or has some other pleasant sensation only in his body.
When Prodicus had thus spoken, quite a number of the company showed their approval then after Prodicus the learned Hippias spoke:
Gentlemen, he said, who are here present, I regard you all as kinsmen and intimates and fellow-citizens by nature, not by law:
for like is akin to like by nature, whereas law, despot of mankind, often constrains us against nature.
Hence it would be shameful if we, while knowing the nature of things, should yet being the wisest of the Greeks, and having met together for the very purpose in the very sanctuary of the wisdom of Greece, and in this the greatest and most auspicious house of the city of cities display no worthy sign of this dignity, but should quarrel with each other like low churls.
Now let me beg and advise you, Protagoras and Socrates, to come to terms arranged, as it were, under our arbitration:
you must, not require that precise form of discussion with its extreme brevity, if it is disagreeable to Protagoras, but let the speeches have their head with a loose rein, that they may give us a more splendid and elegant impression; nor must you, Protagoras, let out full sail, as you run before the breeze, and so escape into the ocean of speech leaving the land nowhere in sight; rather, both of you must take a middle course.
So you shall do as I say, and I strongly urge you to choose an umpire or supervisor or chairman who will keep watch for you over the due measure of either's speeches.
His proposal was approved by the company, and they all applauded it: Callias said he would not let me go, and they requested me to choose a supervisor.
To this I replied that it would be a shame to choose an arbiter for our discussion;
for if he who is chosen, said I, is to be our inferior, it would not be right to have the inferior overseeing the superior; while if he is our equal, that will be just as wrong, for our equal will only do very much as we do, and it will be superfluous to choose him.
You may say you will choose one who is our superior.
This, in very truth, I hold to be impossible to choose someone who is wiser than our friend Protagoras;
and if you choose one who is not his superior, though you may say he is, that again would cast a slur on him, as if he were some paltry fellow requiring a supervisor; for, as far as I am concerned, the matter is indifferent.
But let me tell you how I would have the thing done, so that your eagerness for a conference and a discussion may be satisfied.
If Protagoras does not wish to answer, let him ask questions, and I will answer: at the same time I will try to show him how the answerer, in my view, ought to answer;
and when I have answered all the questions that he wishes to ask, in his turn he shall render account in like manner to me.
So if he does not seem very ready to answer the particular question put to him, you and I will join in beseeching him, as you have besought me, not to upset our conference.
And for this plan there is no need to have one man as supervisor; you will all supervise it together.
They all resolved that it should be done in this way: Protagoras, though very unwilling, was obliged after all to agree to ask questions and then, when he had asked a sufficient number, to take his turn at making due response in short answers.
And so he began to put questions in this sort of way:
I consider, Socrates, that the greatest part of a man's education is to be skilled in the matter of verses; that is, to be able to apprehend, in the utterances of the poets, what has been rightly and what wrongly composed, and to know how to distinguish them and account for them when questioned.
Accordingly my question now will be on the same subject that you and I are now debating, namely virtue, but taken in connexion with poetry: that will be the only difference.
Now, Simonides, I think, somewhere remarks to Scopas, the son of Creon of Thessaly
"For a man, indeed, to become good truly is hard,
In hands and feet and mind foursquare,
Fashioned without reproach."
Do you know the ode, or shall I recite the whole?
To this I replied: There is no need, for I know it it happens that I have especially studied that ode.
I am glad to hear it, he said.
Now do you regard it as finely and correctly composed or not?
Very finely and correctly, I replied.
And do you regard it as finely composed, if the poet contradicts himself?
No, I replied.
Then observe it more closely, he said.
My good sir, I have given it ample attention.
Are you aware, then, he asked, that as the ode proceeds he says at one point
"Nor ringeth true to me That word of Pittacus
And yet 'twas a sage who spake Hard, quoth he, to be good."
Do you note that this and the former are statements of the same person?
I know that, I said.
Then do you think the second agrees with the first?
So far as I can see, it does, I replied (at the same time, though, I was afraid there was something in what he said).
Why, I asked, does it not seem so to you?
How can anyone, he replied, be thought consistent, who says both of these things?
First he laid it down himself that it is hard for a man to become good in truth, and then a little further on in his poem he forgot, and he proceeds to blame Pittacus for saying the same as he did that it is hard to be good, and refuses to accept from him the same statement that he made himself.
Yet, as often as he blames the man for saying the same as himself he obviously blames himself too, so that in either the former or the latter place his statement is wrong.
This speech of his won a clamorous approval from many of his hearers;
and at first I felt as though I had been struck by a skilful boxer, and was quite blind and dizzy with the effect of his words and the noise of their applause.
Then to tell you the honest truth in order to gain time for considering the poet's meaning, I turned to Prodicus and calling him Prodicus, I said, surely Simonides was your townsman:
it behoves you to come to the man's rescue.
Accordingly I allow myself to call for your assistance
just as Scamander, in Homer, when besieged by Achilles, called Simois to his aid, saying "Dear brother, let us both together stay this warriors might."
In the same way I call upon you, lest Protagoras lay Simonides in ruins.
For indeed to rehabilitate Simonides requires your artistry, by which you can discriminate between wishing and desiring as two distinct things in the fine and ample manner of your statement just now.
So please consider if you agree with my view.
For it is not clear that Simonides does contradict himself.
Now you, Prodicus, shall declare your verdict first: do you consider becoming and being to be the same or different?
Different, to be sure, said Prodicus.
Now in the first passage, I said, Simonides gave it as his own opinion that it is hard for a man to become good in truth.
Quite true, said Prodicus.
And he blames Pittacus, I went on, for saying not, as Protagoras holds, the same as himself, but something different.
For what Pittacus said was not, as Simonides said, that it is hard "to become" but "to be" good.
Now being and becoming, Protagoras, as our friend Prodicus says, are not the same thing;
and if being and becoming are not the same thing, Simonides does not contradict himself.
Perhaps Prodicus and many others might say with Hesiod that to become good is hard,
When Prodicus heard this he gave me his approval: but Protagoras observed: Your correction, Socrates, contains an error greater than that which you are correcting.
To which I answered: then it is a bad piece of work I have done, it would seem, Protagoras, and I am an absurd sort of physician; my treatment increases the malady.
Just so, he said.
How is that?
I asked.
Great, he replied, would be the ignorance of the poet, if he calls it such a slight matter to possess virtue, which is the hardest thing in the world, as all men agree.
Then I remarked:
Upon my word, how opportunely it has happened that Prodicus is here to join in our discussion!
For it is very likely, Protagoras, that Prodicus' wisdom is a gift of long ago from heaven, beginning either in the time of Simonides or even earlier.
But you, so skilled in many other things, appear to be unskilled in this, and lack the skill that I can boast because I am a disciple of the great Prodicus;
and so now I find you do not understand that perhaps Simonides did not conceive "hard" in the way that you conceive it just as, in the case of "awful," Prodicus here corrects me each time I use the word in praising you or someone else; when I say, for instance, that Protagoras is an awfully wise man, he asks if I am not ashamed to call good things awful.
For awful, he says, is bad;
thus no one on this or that occasion speaks of "awful wealth" or "awful peace" or "awful health," but we say "awful disease," "awful war" or "awful poverty," taking "awful" to be "bad."
So perhaps "hard" also was intended by the Ceans and Simonides as either "bad" or something else that you do not understand: let us therefore ask Prodicus, for it is fair to question him on the dialect of Simonides.
What did Simonides mean, Prodicus, by "hard"?
"Bad," he replied.
Then it is on this account, Prodicus, I said, that he blames Pittacus for saying it is hard to be good, just as though he heard him say it is bad to be good.
Well, Socrates, he said, what else do you think Simonides meant?
Was he not reproaching Pittacus for not knowing how to distinguish words correctly, Lesbian as he was, and nurtured in a foreign tongue?
You hear, Protagoras, I said, what Prodicus here suggests:
have you anything to say upon it?
The case, said Protagoras, is far otherwise, Prodicus: I am quite sure that Simonides meant by "hard" the same as we generally do not "bad," but whatever is not easy and involves a great amount of trouble.
Ah, I agree with you, Protagoras, I said, that this is Simonides' meaning, and that our friend Prodicus knows it, but is joking and chooses to experiment on you to see if you will be able to support your own statement.
For that Simonides does not mean that "hard" is "bad" we have clear proof forthwith in the next phrase, where he says
"God alone can have this privilege."
Surely he cannot mean that it is bad to be good, if he proceeds here to say that God alone can have this thing, and attributes this privilege to God only; otherwise Prodicus would call Simonides a rake, and no true Cean.
But I should like to tell you what I take to be Simonides' intention in this ode, if you care to test my powers, as you put it, in the matter of verses; though if you would rather, I will hear your account.
When Protagoras heard me say this As you please, Socrates, he said; then Prodicus and Hippias strongly urged me, and the rest of them also.
Well then, I said, I will try to explain to you my own feeling about this poem.
Now philosophy is of more ancient and abundant growth in Crete and Lacedaemon than in any other part of Greece,
and sophists are more numerous in those regions:
but the people there deny it and make pretence of ignorance, in order to prevent the discovery that it is by wisdom that they have ascendancy over the rest of the Greeks, like those sophists of whom Protagoras was speaking; they prefer it to be thought that they owe their superiority to fighting and valor, conceiving that the revelation of its real cause would lead everyone to practise this wisdom.
So well have they kept their secret that they have deceived the followers of the Spartan cult in our cities, with the result that some get broken ears by imitating them, bind their knuckles with thongs, go in for muscular exercises, and wear dashing little cloaks, as though it were by these means that the Spartans were the masters of Greece.
And when the Spartans wish to converse unrestrainedly with their sophists, and begin to chafe at the secrecy of their meetings, they pass alien acts against the laconizing set and any other strangers within their gates, and have meetings with the sophists unknown to the foreigners;
while on their part they do not permit any of their young men to travel abroad to the other cities in this rule they resemble the Cretans lest they unlearn what they are taught at home.
In those two states there are not only men but women also who pride themselves on their education;
and you can tell that what I say is true and that the Spartans have the best education in philosophy and argument by this: if you choose to consort with the meanest of Spartans, at first you will find him making a poor show in the conversation; but soon, at some point or other in the discussion, he gets home with a notable remark, short and compressed a deadly shot that makes his interlocutor seem like a helpless child.
Hence this very truth has been observed by certain persons both in our day and in former times that the Spartan cult is much more the pursuit of wisdom than of athletics; for they know that a man's ability to utter such remarks is to be ascribed to his perfect education.
Such men were Thales of Miletus, Pittacus of Mytilene, Bias of Priene, Solon of our city, Cleobulus of Lindus, Myson of Chen, and, last of the traditional seven, Chilon of Sparta.
All these were enthusiasts, lovers and disciples of the Spartan culture; and you can recognize that character in their wisdom by the short, memorable sayings that fell from each of them they assembled together and dedicated these as the first-fruits of their lore to Apollo in his Delphic temple, inscribing there those maxims which are on every tongue "Know thyself" and "Nothing overmuch."
To what intent do I say this?
To show how the ancient philosophy had this style of laconic brevity; and so it was that the saying of Pittacus was privately handed about with high approbation among the sages that it is hard to be good.
Then Simonides, ambitious to get a name for wisdom, perceived that if he could overthrow this saying, as one might some famous athlete, and become its conqueror, he would win fame himself amongst men of that day.
Accordingly it was against this saying, and with this aim, that he composed the whole poem as a means of covertly assailing and abasing this maxim, as it seems to me.
Now let us all combine in considering whether my account is really true.
The opening of the ode must at once appear crazy if, while intending to say that it is hard for a man to become good, he inserted "indeed."
There is no sort of sense, I imagine, in this insertion, unless we suppose that Simonides is addressing himself to the saying of Pittacus as a disputant:
Pittacus says It is hard to be good; and the poet controverts this by observing No, but to become good, indeed, is hard for a man, Pittacus, truly not truly good; he does not mention truth in this connexion, or imply that some things are truly good, while others are good but not truly so:
this would seem silly and unlike Simonides.
We must rather take the "truly" as a poetical transposition, and first quote the saying of Pittacus in some such way as this: let us suppose Pittacus himself to be speaking and Simonides replying, as thus Good people, he says, it is hard to be good; and the poet answers Pittacus, what you say is not true, for it is not being but becoming good, indeed in hands and feet and mind foursquare, fashioned without reproach that is truly hard.
In this way we see a purpose in the insertion of "indeed," and that the "truly" is correctly placed at the end;
and all that comes after corroborates this view of his meaning.
There are many points in the various expressions of the poem which might be instanced to show its fine composition, for it is a work of very elegant and elaborate art; but it would take too long to detail all its beauties.
However, let us go over its general outline and intention, which is assuredly to refute Pittacus' saying, throughout the ode.
Proceeding a little way on from our passage, just as though he were making a speech, he says to become, indeed, a good man is truly hard (not but what it is possible for a certain space of time); "but to continue in this state of what one has become, and to be a good man is, as you say, Pittacus, impossible, superhuman: God alone can have this privilege
"For that man cannot help but be bad
Whom irresistible mischance has overthrown."
Now who is it that an irresistible mischance overthrows in the command of a ship?
Clearly not the ordinary man, for he may be overcome at any time; just as you cannot knock over one who is lying down, but one who is standing; you might knock over a standing man so as to make him lie down, not one who is lying down already.
So it is a man apt to resist that an irresistible mischance would overthrow, and not one who could never resist anything.
A great storm breaking over a steersman will render him helpless, and a severe season will leave a farmer helpless, and a doctor will be in the same case.
For the good has the capacity of becoming bad, as we have witness in another poet who said "Nay more, the virtuous man is at one time bad, at another good.
"whereas the bad man has no capacity for becoming, but must ever be, what he is; so that when an irresistible mischance overthrows him who is resourceful, wise, and good, he cannot but be bad; and you say, Pittacus, that it is hard to be good that is, to become good, indeed, is hard, though possible, but to be good is impossible: for
"If he hath fared well, every man is good;
Bad, if ill."
Now what is good faring in letters the thing that makes a man good at them?
Clearly, the study of letters.
What welfare makes a good doctor?
Clearly, the study of the cure of the ailing.
"Bad, if ill": who could become a bad doctor?
Clearly, he who in the first place is a doctor, and in the second, a good doctor; for he could become a bad one also: whereas we, who are laymen in respect of medicine, could never by faring ill become either doctors or joiners or anything else of that sort; and if one cannot become a doctor by faring ill, clearly one cannot become a bad one either.
In the same way the good man may one day become bad through the effect either of time or work or illness or some other accident; for there is only one sort of ill fare the deprivation of knowledge.
But the bad man can never become bad: he is that always.
If he is to become bad, he must previously become good.
Hence the upshot of this part of the poem is that it is impossible to be a good man, continuing to be good, but possible to become good, and bad also, in the case of the same person.
"Best also for the longest space are they whom the gods love."
All this has been said with reference to Pittacus, as is made still plainer by the ensuing verses,
for he says
"Therefore never shall I, in quest of what cannot come to pass, vainly cast my life's lot upon a hope impracticable of finding a man wholly blameless amongst us who partake of the fruit of the broad-based earth.
If I light upon him, be sure I will report it "
says he; and in this vehement tone he pursues the saying of Pittacus all through the poem:
"But I praise and love everyone willingly committing no baseness; for against necessity not even the gods make war."
This also is spoken with the same intent.
For Simonides was not so ill-educated as to say that he praised a person who willingly did no evil, as though there were some who did evil willingly.
I am fairly sure of this that none of the wise men considers that anybody ever willingly errs or willingly does base and evil deeds; they are well aware that all who do base and evil things do them unwillingly; and so Simonides does not say he gives his praise to the person who willingly does no evil, but uses the word "willingly" of himself.
For he considered that a man of sense and honor often constrains himself to become a friend and approver of some person, as when a man chances to have an uncongenial mother or father or country or other such connexion.
Now when this sort of thing befalls the wicked, they seem glad to see their parents' or country's faults, and complainingly point them out and inveigh against them, in order that their own neglect of them may not be denounced by their neighbors, who might otherwise reproach them for being so neglectful; and hence they multiply their complaints and add voluntary to unavoidable feuds.
But good men, he knew, conceal the trouble and constrain themselves to praise, and if they have any reason to be angered against their parents or country for some wrong done to them they pacify and conciliate their feelings, compelling themselves to love and praise their own people.
And many a time, I think, Simonides was conscious that he had praised and eulogized some tyrant or other such person, not willingly, but under compulsion.
So he proceeds to tell Pittacus
I, Pittacus, do not reproach you merely because I am apt to reproach, since
"By this he does not mean to say, as it were, that all things are white that have no admixture of black; that would be ridiculous in many ways; but that he himself accepts the average sort without reproaching them.
"I do not seek," said he, "a man wholly blameless amongst us who partake of the fruit of the broad-based earth: if I light upon him, be sure I will report it"
meaning, "If I wait for that, I shall never find anyone to praise.
No, I am content if a man be average and do nothing evil, since I love and praise all" and there he has used a Mytilenaean word, for his "I praise and love all willingly" is addressed to Pittacus (here at "willingly" one should make a pause); "all who commit nothing base, but some there are whom I praise and love unwillingly.
Hence I should never reproach you, Pittacus, if you would only speak what is moderately reasonable and true.
But as it is, since you lie so grievously about the greatest matters with an air of speaking the truth, on this score I reproach you."
Such is my view, Prodicus and Protagoras, I said, of Simonides' intention in composing this ode.
Then Hippias remarked: It certainly seems to me, Socrates, that you have given a good exposition of the poem: but I also have an elegant discourse upon it, which I will perform for you if you wish.
Yes, Hippias, said Alcibiades, but some other time: for the moment the proper thing, according to the agreement which Protagoras and Socrates made between them, will be for Socrates to answer any questions that Protagoras may still wish to put to him, but if he prefers to answer Socrates, then it will be for Socrates to ask.
On this I remarked: For my part I place it in Protagoras's hands to do whichever he likes best.
But if he does not mind, let us talk no more of poems and verses, but consider the points on which I questioned you at first, Protagoras, and on which I should be glad to reach, with your help, a conclusion.
For it seems to me that arguing about poetry is comparable to the wine-parties of common market-folk.
These people, owing to their inability to carry on a familiar conversation over their wine by means of their own voices and discussions such is their lack of education put a premium on flute-girls by hiring the extraneous voice of the flute at a high price, and carry on their intercourse by means of its utterance.
But where the party consists of thorough gentlemen who have had a proper education, you will see neither flute-girls nor dancing-girls nor harp-girls, but only the company contenting themselves with their own conversation, and none of these fooleries and frolics each speaking and listening decently in his turn, even though they may drink a great deal of wine.
And so a gathering like this of ours, when it includes such men as most of us claim to be, requires no extraneous voices, not even of the poets, whom one cannot question on the sense of what they say; when they are adduced in discussion we are generally told by some that the poet thought so and so, and by others, something different, and they go on arguing about a matter which they are powerless to determine.
No, this sort of meeting is avoided by men of culture, who prefer to converse directly with each other, and to use their own way of speech in putting one another by turns to the test.
It is this sort of person that I think you and I ought rather to imitate; putting the poets aside, let us hold our discussion together in our own persons, making trial of the truth and of ourselves.
So if you wish to question me further, I am at your service as answerer; but if you like, put yourself at my service, so that we may clear up the several points of the inquiry in which we stopped half-way.
On my saying this and something more of the sort, Protagoras gave no indication as to which course he would take.
So Alcibiades, looking at Callias, said: Do you consider, Callias, that Protagoras is behaving properly now in refusing to signify whether he will or will not answer?
I do not think he is.
Let him either debate or say that he does not want to debate, so that we may have this understanding with him; then Socrates can debate with someone else, or another of us with some other, as may be agreed.
Then Protagoras was ashamed, as it seemed to me, at these words of Alcibiades, and the more so when Callias requested him, together with almost the whole of the company; and so he reluctantly prevailed on himself to take up the debate, and asked to have questions put to him, since he was ready to answer.
So I proceeded to say Protagoras, do not suppose that I have any other desire in debating with you than to examine the difficulties which occur to myself at each point.
For I hold that there is a good deal in what Homer says "When two go together, one observes before the other;"
for somehow it makes all of us human beings more resourceful in every deed or word or thought; but if one observes something alone, forthwith one has to go about searching until one discovers somebody to whom one can show it off and who can corroborate it.
And I also have my reason for being glad to debate with you rather than with anyone else; it is that I regard you as the best person to investigate in general any matters that a sensible man may be expected to examine, and virtue in particular.
Whom else should I choose but you?
Not only do you consider yourself a worthy gentleman, like sundry other people, who are sensible enough themselves, but cannot make others so;
but you are both good yourself and have the gift of making others good.
And you are so confident of yourself that, while others make a secret of this art, you have had yourself publicly proclaimed to all the Greeks with the title of sophist, and have appointed yourself preceptor of culture and virtue, and are the first who has ever demanded a regular fee for such work.
What then could I do but call upon you to deal with our problem both by question and communication?
I had no other course.
So now with regard to those points which I have raised on the subject in my opening questions, I desire to be reminded of some by you and to have your help in investigating others.
The question, I believe, was this: Are the five names of wisdom, temperance, courage, justice, and holiness attached to one thing, or underlying each of these names is there a distinct existence or thing that has its own particular function, each thing being different from the others?
And your answer was that they are not names attached to one thing, but that each of these names applies to a distinct thing, and that all these are parts of virtue; not like the parts of gold, which are similar to each other and to the whole of which they are parts, but like the parts of the face, dissimilar to the whole of which they are parts and to each other, and each having a distinct function.
If you still hold the same opinion of them, say so;
if you have a new one, define what it is, for I make no objection to your replying now on other lines.
Indeed I should not be surprised if you were merely experimenting upon me when you spoke before.
Well, Socrates, he replied, I say that all these are parts of virtue, and that while four of them are fairly on a par with each other, courage is something vastly different from all the rest.
You may perceive the truth of what I say from this: you will find many people extremely unjust, unholy, dissolute, and ignorant, and yet pre-eminently courageous.
Stop now, I said: we must duly examine what you say.
Do you call courageous men bold, or something else?
Yes, and impetuous also, he replied, where most men fear to tread.
Well now, do you say that virtue is a good thing, and of this good thing offer yourself as teacher?
Nay, it is the best of things, he said, unless I am out of my senses.
Then is one part of it base and another good, or is the whole good?
Surely the whole is good in the highest possible degree.
Now do you know who dive boldly into wells?
I do; divers.
Is this because they have knowledge, or for some other reason?
Because they have knowledge.
And who are bold in going to war on horseback?
those who are practised horsemen, or those who are not?
Practised horsemen.
And who with bucklers?
buckler-men, or those who are not?
Buckler-men:
and so with all other cases, he went on, if that is your point; those who have knowledge are bolder than those who lack it, and individually they are bolder when they have learnt than before learning.
But you must have seen at times, I said, persons who are without knowledge of any of these affairs, yet behaving boldly in each of them.
I have, he said, and very boldly too.
Then are these bold ones courageous also?
Nay, that would make courage a base thing, he replied; for those you speak of are out of their senses.
What then, I asked, do you mean by courageous men?
Surely the same as bold men?
Yes, I do still, he said.
Then these men, I went on, who are so brave, are found to be not courageous but mad?
And in those former cases our wisest men are boldest too, and being boldest are most courageous?
And on this reasoning, wisdom will be courage?
You do not rightly recall, Socrates, what I stated in replying to you.
When you asked me whether courageous men are bold, I admitted it:
I was not asked whether bold men are courageous.
Had you asked me this before, I should have said "Not all."
And as to proving that courageous men are not bold, you have nowhere pointed out that I was wrong in my admission that they are.
Next you show that such persons individually are bolder when they have knowledge, and bolder than others who lack it, and therewith you take courage and wisdom to be the same: proceeding in this manner you might even take strength to be wisdom.
On this method you might begin by asking me whether the strong are powerful, and I should say "Yes"; and then, whether those who know how to wrestle are more powerful than those who do not know how to wrestle, and whether individually they are more powerful when they have learnt than before learning, and I should say "Yes."
And on my admitting these points it would be open to you to say, by the same token, that according to my admission wisdom is strength.
But neither there nor elsewhere do I admit that the powerful are strong, only that the strong are powerful; for I hold that power and strength are not the same, but that one of them, power, comes from knowledge, or from madness or rage, whereas strength comes from constitution and fit nurture of the body.
So, in the other instance, boldness and courage are not the same, and therefore it results that the courageous are bold, but not that the bold are courageous; for boldness comes to a man from art, or from rage or madness, like power, whereas courage comes from constitution and fit nurture of the soul.
Do you speak of some men, Protagoras, I asked, as living well, and others ill?
Yes.
Then do you consider that a man would live well if he lived in distress and anguish?
No, he said.
Well now, if he lived pleasantly and so ended his life?
would you not consider he had thus contrived to live well?
I would, he said.
And, I suppose, to live pleasantly is good, and unpleasantly, bad?
Yes, he said, if one lived in the enjoyment of honorable things.
But, Protagoras, will you tell me you agree with the majority in calling some pleasant things bad and some painful ones good?
I mean to say Are not things good in so far as they are pleasant, putting aside any other result they may have;
and again, are not painful things in just the same sense bad in so far as they are painful?
I cannot tell, Socrates, he replied, whether I am to answer, in such absolute fashion as that of your question, that all pleasant things are good and painful things bad: I rather think it safer for me to reply, with a view not merely to my present answer but to all the rest of my life, that some pleasant things are not good, and also that some painful things are not bad, and some are, while a third class of them are indifferent neither bad nor good.
You call pleasant, do you not, I asked, things that partake of pleasure or cause pleasure?
Certainly, he said.
So when I put it to you, whether things are not good in so far as they are pleasant, I am asking whether pleasure itself is not a good thing.
Let us examine the matter, Socrates, he said, in the form in which you put it at each point, and if the proposition seems to be reasonable, and pleasant and good are found to be the same, we shall agree upon it; if not, we shall dispute it there and then.
And would you like, I asked, to be leader in the inquiry, or am I to lead?
You ought to lead, he replied, since you are the inaugurator of this discussion.
Well then, I proceeded, will the following example give us the light we need?
Just as, in estimating a man's health or bodily efficiency by his appearance, one might look at his face and the lower part of his arms and say:
Come now, uncover your chest too and your back and show them, that I may examine you thoroughly so the same sort of desire comes over me in regard to our inquiry.
Observing your condition to be as you describe in respect of the good and the pleasant, I am fain to say something like this:
Come, my good Protagoras, uncover some more of your thoughts: how are you in regard to knowledge?
Do you share the view that most people take of this, or have you some other?
The opinion generally held of knowledge is something of this sort that it is no strong or guiding or governing thing; it is not regarded as anything of that kind, but people think that, while a man often has knowledge in him, he is not governed by it, but by something else now by passion, now by pleasure, now by pain, at times by love, and often by fear; their feeling about knowledge is just what they have about a slave, that it may be dragged about by any other force.
Now do you agree with this view of it, or do you consider that knowledge is something noble and able to govern man, and that whoever learns what is good and what is bad will never be swayed by anything to act otherwise than as knowledge bids, and that intelligence is a sufficient succor for mankind?
My view, Socrates, he replied, is precisely that which you express, and what is more, it would be a disgrace for me above all men to assert that wisdom and knowledge were aught but the highest of all human things.
Well and truly spoken, I said.
Now you know that most people will not listen to you and me, but say that many, while knowing what is best, refuse to perform it, though they have the power, and do other things instead.
And whenever I have asked them to tell me what can be the reason of this, they say that those who act so are acting under the influence of pleasure or pain, or under the control of one of the things I have just mentioned.
Yes, Socrates, he replied, I regard this as but one of the many erroneous sayings of mankind.
Come then, and join me in the endeavor to persuade the world and explain what is this experience of theirs, which they call "being overcome by pleasure," and which they give as the reason why they fail to do what is best though they have knowledge of it.
For perhaps if we said to them: What you assert, good people, is not correct, but quite untrue they might ask us: Protagoras and Socrates, if this experience is not "being overcome by pleasure" what on earth is it, and what do you call it?
Tell us that.
Why, Socrates, must we consider the opinion of the mass of mankind, who say just what occurs to them?
I fancy, I replied, that this will be a step towards discovering how courage is related to the other parts of virtue.
So if you think fit to abide by the arrangement we made a while ago that I should lead in the direction which seems best for elucidating the matter you must now follow; but if you would rather not, to suit your wishes I will let it pass.
No, he said, your plan is quite right: go on to the end as you began.
Once more then, I proceeded, suppose they should ask us: Then what do you call this thing which we described as "being overcome by pleasures"?
The answer I should give them would be this: Please attend; Protagoras and I will try to explain it to you.
Do you not say that this thing occurs, good people, in the common case of a man being overpowered by the pleasantness of food or drink or sexual acts, and doing what he does though he knows it to be wicked?
They would admit it.
Then you and I would ask them again: In what sense do you call such deeds wicked?
Is it that they produce those pleasures and are themselves pleasant at the moment, or that later on they cause diseases and poverty, and have many more such ills in store for us?
Or, even though they have none of these things in store for a later day, and cause us only enjoyment, would they still be evil just because, forsooth, they cause enjoyment in some way or other?
Can we suppose, Protagoras, that they will make any other answer than that these things are evil, not according to the operation of the actual pleasure of the moment, but owing to the later results in disease and those other ills?
I think, said Protagoras, that most people would answer thus.
Then in causing diseases they cause pains?
And in causing poverty they cause pains?
They would admit this, I imagine.
Protagoras agreed.
Then does it seem to you, my friends, as Protagoras and I assert, that the only reason why these things are evil is that they end at last in pains, and deprive us of other pleasures?
Would they admit this?
We both agreed that they would.
Then again, suppose we should ask them the opposite: You, sirs, who tell us on the other hand that good things are painful do you not give such instances as physical training, military service, and medical treatment conducted by cautery, incision, drugs, or starvation, and say that these are good, but painful?
Would they not grant it?
He agreed that they would.
Then do you call them good because they produce extreme pangs and anguish for the moment, or because later on they result in health and good bodily condition, the deliverance of cities, dominion over others, and wealth?
They would assent to this, I suppose.
He agreed.
And are these things good for any other reason than that they end at last in pleasures and relief and riddance of pains?
Or have you some other end to mention, with respect to which you call them good, apart from pleasures and pains?
They could not find one, I fancy.
I too think they could not, said Protagoras.
Then do you pursue pleasure as being a good thing, and shun pain as being a bad one?
He agreed that we do.
So one thing you hold to be bad pain; and pleasure you hold to be good, since the very act of enjoying you call bad as soon as it deprives us of greater pleasures than it has in itself, or leads to greater pains than the pleasures it contains.
For if it is with reference to something else that you call the act of enjoyment bad, and with a view to some other end, you might be able to tell it us but this you will be unable to do.
I too think that they cannot, said Protagoras.
Then is not the same thing repeated in regard to the state of being pained?
You call being pained a good thing as soon as it either rids us of greater pains than those it comprises, or leads to greater pleasures than its pains.
Now if you have in view some other end than those which I mention when you call being pained good, you can tell it us; but you never can.
Truly spoken, said Protagoras.
Once more then, I proceeded; if you were to ask me, my friends, Now why on earth do you speak at such length on this point, and in so many ways?
I should reply, Forgive me:
in the first place, it is not easy to conclude what it is that you mean when you say "overcome by pleasures"; and secondly, on this point hang all our conclusions.
But it is still quite possible to retract, if you can somehow contrive to say that the good is different from pleasure, or the bad from pain.
Is it enough for you to live out your life pleasantly, without pain?
If it is, and you are unable to tell us of any other good or evil that does not end in pleasure or pain, listen to what I have to say next.
I tell you that if this is so, the argument becomes absurd, when you say that it is often the case that a man, knowing the evil to be evil, nevertheless commits it, when he might avoid it, because he is driven and dazed by his pleasures;
while on the other hand you say that a man, knowing the good, refuses to do good because of the momentary pleasures by which he is overcome.
The absurdity of all this will be manifest if we refrain from using a number of terms at once, such as pleasant, painful, good, and bad; and as there appeared to be two things, let us call them by two names first, good and evil, and then later on, pleasant and painful.
Let us then lay it down as our statement, that a man does evil in spite of knowing the evil of it.
Now if someone asks us: Why?
we shall answer: Because he is overcome.
By what? the questioner will ask us and this time we shall be unable to reply: By pleasure for this has exchanged its name for "the good."
So we must answer only with the words: Because he is overcome.
By what? says the questioner.
The good must surely be our reply.
Now if our questioner chance to be an arrogant person he will laugh and exclaim:
What a ridiculous statement, that a man does evil, knowing it to be evil, and not having to do it, because he is overcome by the good!
Is this, he will ask, because the good is not worthy of conquering the evil in you, or because it is worthy?
Clearly we must reply:
Because it is not worthy;
otherwise he whom we speak of as overcome by pleasures would not have offended.
But in what sense, he might ask us, is the good unworthy of the bad, or the bad of the good?
This can only be when the one is greater and the other smaller,
or when there are more on the one side and fewer on the other.
We shall not find any other reason to give;
So it is clear, he will say, that by "being overcome" you mean getting the greater evil in exchange for the lesser good.
That must be agreed.
Then let us apply the terms "pleasant" and "painful" to these things instead, and say that a man does what we previously called evil, but now call painful, knowing it to be painful, because he is overcome by the pleasant, which is obviously unworthy to conquer.
What unworthiness can there be in pleasure as against pain, save an excess or defect of one compared with the other?
That is, when one becomes greater and the other smaller, or when there are more on one side and fewer on the other, or here a greater degree and there a less.
For if you should say: But, Socrates, the immediately pleasant differs widely from the subsequently pleasant or painful, I should reply: Do they differ in anything but pleasure and pain?
That is the only distinction.
Like a practised weigher, put pleasant things and painful in the scales, and with them the nearness and the remoteness, and tell me which count for more.
For if you weigh pleasant things against pleasant, the greater and the more are always to be preferred: if painful against painful, then always the fewer and smaller.
If you weigh pleasant against painful, and find that the painful are outbalanced by the pleasant whether the near by the remote or the remote by the near you must take that course of action to which the pleasant are attached; but not that course if the pleasant are outweighed by the painful.
Can the case be otherwise, I should ask, than thus, my friends?
I am certain they could state no alternative.
To this he too assented.
Since that is the case, then, I shall say, please answer me this:
Does not the same size appear larger to your sight when near, and smaller when distant?
They will admit this.
And it is the same with thickness and number?
And sounds of equal strength are greater when near, and smaller when distant?
They would agree to this.
Now if our welfare consisted in doing and choosing things of large dimensions, and avoiding and not doing those of small, what would be our salvation in life?
Would it be the art of measurement, or the power of appearance?
Is it not the latter that leads us astray, as we saw, and many a time causes us to take things topsy-turvy and to have to change our minds both in our conduct and in our choice of great or small?
Whereas the art of measurement would have made this appearance ineffective, and by showing us the truth would have brought our soul into the repose of abiding by the truth, and so would have saved our life.
Would men acknowledge, in view of all this, that the art which saves our life is measurement, or some other?
It is measurement, he agreed.
Well now, if the saving of our life depended on the choice of odd or even, and on knowing when to make a right choice of the greater and when of the less taking each by itself or comparing it with the other, and whether near or distant
what would save our life?
Would it not be knowledge;
a knowledge of measurement, since the art here is concerned with excess and defect,
and of numeration, as it has to do with odd and even?
People would admit this, would they not?
Protagoras agreed that they would.
Well then, my friends, since we have found that the salvation of our life depends on making a right choice of pleasure and pain of the more and the fewer, the greater and the smaller, and the nearer and the remoter is it not evident, in the first place, that measurement is a study of their excess and defect and equality in relation to each other?
This must needs be so.
And being measurement, I presume it must be an art or science?
They will assent to this.
Well, the nature of this art or science we shall consider some other time;
but the mere fact of its being a science will suffice for the proof which Protagoras and I are required to give in answer to the question you have put to us.
You asked it, if you remember, when we were agreeing that there is nothing stronger than knowledge, and that knowledge, wherever it may be found, has always the upper hand of pleasure or anything else; and then you said that pleasure often masters even the man of knowledge, and on our refusing to agree with you, you went on to ask us:
Protagoras and Socrates, if this experience is not "being overcome by pleasure," whatever can it be, and what do you call it?
Tell us.
If on the spur of the moment we had replied, "Ignorance," you would have laughed us to scorn:
but now if you laugh at us you will be laughing at yourselves as well.
For you have admitted that it is from defect of knowledge that men err, when they do err, in their choice of pleasures and pains that is, in the choice of good and evil;
and from defect not merely of knowledge but of the knowledge which you have now admitted also to be that of measurement.
And surely you know well enough for yourselves that the erring act committed without knowledge is done through ignorance.
Accordingly "to be overcome by pleasure" means just this ignorance in the highest degree, which Protagoras here and Prodicus and Hippias profess to cure.
But you, through supposing it to be something else than ignorance, will neither go yourselves nor send your children to these sophists, who are the teachers of those things you say it cannot be taught; you are chary of your money and will give them none, and so you fare badly both in private and in public life.
Such would have been our answer to the world at large.
And I ask you now, Hippias and Prodicus, as well as Protagoras for I would have you make a joint reply whether you think what I say is true or false.
They all thought what I had said was absolutely true.
Then you agree, I continued, that the pleasant is good and the painful bad.
And let me entreat my friend Prodicus to spare me his distinction of terms: for whether you say pleasant or delightful or enjoyable, my excellent Prodicus, or in whatever style or manner you may be pleased to name these things, pray reply to the sense of my question.
At this Prodicus laughed and consented, as did the rest.
Well now, my friends, I said, what of this?
All actions aimed at living painlessly and pleasantly are honorable, are they not?
And the honorable work is both good and useful?
They agreed.
Then if, I proceeded, the pleasant is good, no one who has knowledge or thought of other actions as better than those he is doing, and as possible, will do as he proposes if he is free to do the better ones; and this yielding to oneself is nothing but ignorance, and mastery of oneself is as certainly wisdom.
They all agreed.
Well then, by ignorance do you mean having a false opinion and being deceived about matters of importance?
They all agreed to this also.
Then surely, I went on, no one willingly goes after evil or what he thinks to be evil; it is not in human nature, apparently, to do so to wish to go after what one thinks to be evil in preference to the good; and when compelled to choose one of two evils, nobody will choose the greater when he may the lesser.
All this met with the assent of everyone.
Well, I said, is there something you call dread, or fear?
And is it
I address myself to you, Prodicus
the same as I have in mind something I describe as an expectation of evil, whether you call it fear or dread?
Protagoras and Hippias agreed to this description of dread or fear; but Prodicus thought this was dread, not fear.
No matter, Prodicus, I said, but my point is this:
if our former statements are true, will any man wish to go after what he dreads, when he may pursue what he does not?
Surely this is impossible after what we have admitted
that he regards as evil that which he dreads?
And what is regarded as evil is neither pursued nor accepted willingly, we saw, by anyone.
Here also they were all in agreement.
So much, then, being granted, Prodicus and Hippias, I said, let our friend Protagoras vindicate the correctness of the answer he made at first not that which he made at the very beginning,
when he said that, while there were five parts of virtue, none of them was like any other, but each had its particular function:
I do not refer to that, but the statement he made afterwards, when he proceeded to say that four of them had a considerable resemblance to each other, but one was quite different from the rest courage; and he told me I should perceive this by the following token: You will find, Socrates, said he, that men may be most unholy, most unjust, most dissolute, and most ignorant, yet most courageous; whence you may judge that courage is very different from the other parts of virtue.
His answer caused me great surprise at the moment, and still more when I went into the matter with your help.
But anyhow, I asked him whether by the brave he meant "bold."
Yes, he replied, and impetuous.
Protagoras, I said, do you remember making this answer?
He admitted he did.
Well now, I said, tell us, towards what do you mean they are impetuous when they are courageous?
Towards the same things as cowards?
No, he said.
Then towards other things?
Yes, he said.
Do cowards go after things that allow boldness, and the courageous after dreadful things?
So people say, Socrates.
Quite true, I said.
But my point is rather, towards what, according to you, are the brave impetuous?
Dreadful things, in the belief that they are dreadful, or towards what is not dreadful?
No, he said; the former has just been shown, by the arguments you put forward, to be impossible.
Quite true again, I said; so that if this proof was correct, no one goes to meet what he regards as dreadful, since to be overcome by oneself was found to be ignorance.
He admitted this.
And yet all men go also to meet what they can face boldly, whether cowardly or brave, and in this respect cowardly and brave go to meet the same things.
But still, Socrates, he said, what cowards go to meet is the very opposite of what the courageous go to meet.
For instance, the latter are willing to go to war, but the former are not.
Is going to war an honorable thing, I asked, or a base thing?
Honorable, he replied.
Then if it is honorable, we have admitted, by our former argument, that it is also good for we agreed that all honorable actions were good.
True, and I abide by that decision.
You are right to do so, I said.
But which sort of men do you say are not willing to go to war, that being an honorable and good thing to do?
The cowardly, he replied.
Then, I went on, if it is honorable and good, is it also pleasant?
That certainly has been admitted, he said.
Now do the cowards wittingly refuse to go to what is more honorable, better, and pleasanter?
Well, if we admit that too, he replied, we shall undo our previous admissions.
But what of the courageous man?
Does he not go to the more honorable and better and pleasanter?
I am forced to admit that, he said.
Now, in general, courageous men do not feel base fears, when they fear, nor is there anything base in their boldness?
True, he said.
And if not base, then it must be honorable?
He admitted this.
And if honorable, then good?
Yes.
And the cowardly and the bold and the mad, on the contrary, feel base fears and base boldness?
He agreed.
Do they feel base and evil boldness solely through stupidity and ignorance?
Just so, he said.
Well now, the cause of cowards being cowardly, do you call this cowardice or courage?
Cowardice, I call it, he replied.
And were they not found to be cowards through ignorance of what is dreadful?
Certainly, he said.
And so they are cowards because of that ignorance?
He agreed.
And the cause of their being cowards is admitted by you to be cowardice?
He assented.
Then ignorance of what is dreadful and not dreadful will be cowardice?
He nodded assent.
But surely courage, I went on, is the opposite of cowardice.
Yes.
Then the wisdom that knows what is and what is not dreadful is opposed to the ignorance of these things?
To this he could still nod assent.
And the ignorance of them is cowardice?
To this he nodded very reluctantly.
So the wisdom that knows what is and what is not dreadful is courage, being opposed to the ignorance of these things?
Here he could no longer bring himself to nod agreement, and remained silent.
Then I proceeded: Why is it, Protagoras, that you neither affirm nor deny what I ask you?
Finish it, he said, by yourself.
I must first ask you, I said, just one more question: Do you still think, as at the beginning, that there are any people who are most ignorant and yet most courageous?
I see, Socrates, you have set your heart on making me your answerer; so, to oblige you, I will say that by what we have admitted I consider it impossible.
My only motive, I then said, in asking all these questions has been a desire to examine the various relations of virtue and its own special nature.
For I know that, were it once made plain, that other question on which you and I have argued at such length on either side you maintaining and I denying that virtue can be taught would be cleared up satisfactorily.
Our discussion, in its present result, seems to me as though it accused and mocked us like some human person; if it were given a voice it would say:
"What strange creatures you are, Socrates and Protagoras!
You on the one hand, after having said at first that virtue cannot be taught, are now hot in opposition to yourself, endeavoring to prove that all things are knowledge justice, temperance, and courage which is the best way to make virtue appear teachable:
for if virtue were anything else than knowledge, as Protagoras tried to make out, obviously it would not be teachable; but if as a matter of fact it turns out to be entirely knowledge, as you urge, Socrates, I shall be surprised if it is not teachable.
Protagoras, on the other hand, though at first he claimed that it was teachable, now seems as eager for the opposite, declaring that it has been found to be almost anything but knowledge, which would make it quite unteachable!"
Now I, Protagoras, observing the extraordinary tangle into which we have managed to get the whole matter, am most anxious to have it thoroughly cleared up.
And I should like to work our way through it until at last we reach what virtue is, and then go back and consider whether it is teachable or not, lest perchance your Epimetheus beguile and trip us up in our investigation as he overlooked us in your account of his distribution.
I like the Prometheus of your fable better than the Epimetheus; for he is of use to me, and I take Promethean thought continually for my own life when I am occupied with all these questions; so, with your consent, as I said at the beginning, I should be delighted to have your aid in the inquiry.
I approve your zeal, Socrates, said Protagoras, and the way you develop your arguments; for I think I am not ill-natured, and I am the last person on earth to be envious.
Indeed I have told many people how I regard you as the man I admire far above any that I meet, and as quite an exception to men of your age; and I say I should not be surprised if you won high repute for wisdom.
We shall pursue the subject on some other occasion, at your pleasure: for the present, it is time to turn to another affair.
I quite agree, said I, if you think so:
for I was long ago due to be where I told you I was going; I stayed merely to oblige our excellent Callias.
Here our colloquy ended, and each went his way.
Gorgias
Callicles
Socrates
Chaerephon
Gorgias
Polus
Callicles
To join in a fight or a fray, as the saying is, Socrates, you have chosen your time well enough.
Socrates
Do you mean, according to the proverb, we have come too late for a feast?
Callicles
Yes, a most elegant feast; for Gorgias gave us a fine and varied display but a moment ago.
Socrates
But indeed, Callicles, it is Chaerephon here who must take the blame for this; he forced us to spend our time in the market-place.
Chaerephon
No matter, Socrates I will take the curing of it too
for Gorgias is a friend of mine, so that he will give us a display now, if you think fit, or if you prefer, on another occasion.
Callicles
What, Chaerephon?
Has Socrates a desire to hear Gorgias?
Chaerephon
Yes, it is for that very purpose we are here.
Callicles
Then whenever you have a mind to pay me a call Gorgias is staying with me, and he will give you a display.
Socrates
Thank you, Callicles: but would he consent to discuss with us?
For I want to find out from the man what is the function of his art, and what it is that he professes and teaches.
As for the rest of his performance, he must give it us, as you suggest, on another occasion.
Callicles
The best way is to ask our friend himself, Socrates: for indeed that was one of the features of his performance.
Why, only this moment he was pressing for whatever questions anyone in the house might like to ask, and saying he would answer them all.
Socrates
What a good idea!
Ask him, Chaerephon.
Chaerephon
What am I to ask?
Socrates
What he is.
Chaerephon
How do you mean?
Socrates
Just as, if he chanced to be in the shoe-making business, his answer would have been, I presume, "a shoemaker."
Now, don't you see my meaning?
Chaerephon
I see, and will ask him.
Tell me, Gorgias, is Callicles here correct in saying that you profess to answer any questions one may ask you?
Gorgias
He is, Chaerephon; indeed, I was just now making this very profession, and I may add that nobody has asked me anything new for many years now.
Chaerephon
So I presume you will easily answer, Gorgias.
Gorgias
You are free to make trial of that, Chaerephon.
Polus
Yes, to be sure; and, if you like, Chaerephon, of me.
For I think Gorgias must be quite tired out, after the long discourse he has just delivered.
Chaerephon
Why, Polus,
do you suppose you could answer more excellently than Gorgias?
Polus
And what does that matter, if I should satisfy you?
Chaerephon
Not at all; since it is your wish, answer.
Polus
Ask.
Chaerephon
Then I ask you,
if Gorgias chanced to be skilled in the same art as his brother Herodicus, what should we be justified in calling him?
What we call his brother, should we not?
Polus
Certainly.
Chaerephon
Then we should make a right statement if we described him as a doctor.
Polus
Yes.
Chaerephon
And if he were expert in the same art as Aristophon, son of Aglaophon, or his brother, what name should we rightly give him?
Polus
Obviously that of painter.
Chaerephon
But as it is, we would like to know in what art he is skilled, and hence by what name we should rightly call him.
Polus
Chaerephon, there are many arts amongst mankind that have been discovered experimentally, as the result of experiences: for experience conducts the course of our life according to art, but inexperience according to chance.
Of these several arts various men partake in various ways, and the best men of the best.
Gorgias here is one of these, and he is a partner in the finest art of all.
Socrates
Fine, at any rate, Gorgias, is the equipment for discourse that Polus seems to have got: but still he is not performing his promise to Chaerephon.
Gorgias
How exactly, Socrates ?
Socrates
He does not seem to me to be quite answering what he is asked.
Gorgias
Well, will you please ask him?
Socrates
No, if you yourself will be so good as to answer, why, I would far rather ask you.
For I see plainly, from what he has said, that Polus has had more practice in what is called rhetoric than in discussion.
Polus
How so, Socrates ?
Socrates
Because, Polus, when Chaerephon has asked in what art Gorgias is skilled, you merely eulogize his art as though it were under some censure, instead of replying what it is.
Polus
Why, did I not reply that it was the finest?
Socrates
You certainly did:
but nobody asked what was the quality of his art, only what it was, and by what name we ought to call Gorgias.
Just as Chaerephon laid out the lines for you at first, and you answered him properly in brief words, in the same way you must now state what is that art, and what we ought to call Gorgias; or rather, Gorgias, do you tell us yourself in what art it is you are skilled, and hence, what we ought to call you.
Gorgias
Rhetoric, Socrates.
Socrates
So we are to call you a rhetorician ?
Gorgias
Yes, and a good one, if you would call me what to use Homer's phrase "I vaunt myself to be."
Socrates
Well, I shall be pleased to do so.
Gorgias
Then call me such.
Socrates
And are we to say that you are able to make others like yourself?
Gorgias
Yes, that is what I profess to do, not only here, but elsewhere also.
Socrates
Then would you be willing, Gorgias, to continue this present way of discussion, by alternate question and answer, and defer to some other time that lengthy style of speech in which Polus made a beginning?
Come, be true to your promise, and consent to answer each question briefly.
Gorgias
There are some answers, Socrates, that necessitate a lengthy expression: however, I will try to be as brief as possible;
for indeed it is one of my claims that no one could express the same thing in briefer terms than myself.
Socrates
That is just what I want, Gorgias: give me a display of this very skill in brevity of speech; your lengthy style will do another time.
Gorgias
Well, I will do that, and you will admit that you never heard anyone speak more briefly.
Socrates
Come then; since you claim to be skilled in rhetorical art, and to be able to make anyone else a rhetorician, tell me with what particular thing rhetoric is concerned: as,
for example, weaving is concerned with the manufacture of clothes, is it not?
Gorgias
Yes.
Socrates
And music, likewise, with the making of tunes?
Gorgias
Yes.
Socrates
Upon my word, Gorgias, I do admire your answers!
You make them as brief as they well can be.
Gorgias
Yes, Socrates, I consider myself a very fair hand at that.
Socrates
You are right there.
Come now, answer me in the same way about rhetoric: with what particular thing is its skill concerned?
Gorgias
With speech.
Socrates
What kind of speech, Gorgias?
Do you mean that which shows sick people by what regimen they could get well?
Gorgias
No.
Socrates
Then rhetoric is not concerned with all kinds of speech.
Gorgias
No, I say.
Socrates
Yet it does make men able to speak.
Gorgias
Yes.
Socrates
And to understand also the things about which they speak.
Gorgias
Of course.
Socrates
Now, does the medical art, which we mentioned just now, make men able to understand and speak about the sick?
Gorgias
It must.
Socrates
Hence the medical art also, it seems, is concerned with speech.
Gorgias
Yes.
Socrates
That is, speech about diseases?
Gorgias
Certainly.
Socrates
Now, is gymnastic also concerned with speech about the good and bad condition of our bodies?
Gorgias
Quite so.
Socrates
And moreover it is the same, Gorgias, with all the other arts; each of them is concerned with that kind of speech which deals with the subject matter of that particular art.
Gorgias
Apparently.
Socrates
Then why, pray, do you not give the name "rhetorical" to those other arts, when they are concerned with speech, if you call that "rhetoric" which has to do with speech?
Gorgias
Because, Socrates, the skill in those other arts is almost wholly concerned with manual work and similar activities, whereas in rhetoric there is no such manual working, but its whole activity and efficacy is by means of speech.
For this reason I claim for the rhetorical art that it is concerned with speech, and it is a correct description, I maintain.
Socrates
Now, do I understand what sort of art you choose to call it?
Perhaps, however, I shall get to know this more clearly.
But answer me this: we have arts, have we not?
Gorgias
Yes.
Socrates
Then amongst the various arts some, I take it, consist mainly of work, and so require but brief speech; while others require none, for the art's object may be achieved actually in silence, as with painting, sculpture, and many other arts.
It is to such as these that I understand you to refer when you say rhetoric has no concern with them; is not that so?
Gorgias
Your supposition is quite correct, Socrates.
Socrates
But there is another class of arts which achieve their whole purpose through speech and to put it roughly require either no action to aid them, or very little; for example, numeration, calculation, geometry, draught-playing, and many other arts: some of these have the speech in about equal proportion to the action, but most have it as the larger part, or absolutely the whole of their operation and effect is by means of speech.
It is one of this class of arts that I think you refer to as rhetoric.
Gorgias
You are right.
Socrates
But, mind you, I do not think it is any one of these that you mean to call rhetoric; though, so far as your expression went, you did say that the art which has its effect through speech is rhetoric, and one might retort, if one cared to strain at mere words: So, Gorgias, you call numeration rhetoric!
But I do not believe it is either numeration or geometry that you call rhetoric.
Gorgias
Your belief is correct, Socrates, and your supposition just.
Socrates
Come now, and do your part in finishing off the answer to my question.
Since rhetoric is in fact one of these arts which depend mainly on speech, and there are likewise other arts of the same nature, try if you can tell me with what this rhetoric, which has its effect in speech, is concerned.
For instance, suppose some one asked me about one or other of the arts which I was mentioning just now:
Socrates, what is the art of numeration?
I should tell him, as you did me a moment ago, that it is one of those which have their effect through speech.
And suppose he went on to ask: With what is its speech concerned?
I should say: With the odd and even numbers, and the question of how many units there are in each.
And if he asked again: What art is it that you call calculation?
I should say that this also is one of those which achieve their whole effect by speech.
And if he proceeded to ask: With what is it concerned?
I should say in the manner of those who draft amendments in the Assembly that in most respects calculation is in the same case as numeration, for both are concerned with the same thing, the odd and the even; but that they differ to this extent, that calculation considers the numerical values of odd and even numbers not merely in themselves but in relation to each other.
And suppose, on my saying that astronomy also achieves its whole effect by speech,
he were to ask me: And the speech of astronomy, with what is it concerned, Socrates?
I should say: With the courses of the stars and sun and moon, and their relative speeds.
Gorgias
And you would be right, Socrates.
Socrates
Come then and do your part, Gorgias:
rhetoric is one of those arts, is it not, which carry out their work and achieve their effect by speech.
Gorgias
That is so.
Socrates
Then tell me what they deal with:
what subject is it, of all in the world, that is dealt with by this speech employed by rhetoric?
Gorgias
The greatest of human affairs, Socrates, and the best.
Socrates
But that also, Gorgias, is ambiguous, and still by no means clear.
I expect you have heard people singing over their cups the old catch, in which the singers enumerate the best things in life, ""first health, then beauty, and thirdly," as the maker of the catch puts it, "wealth got without guile.""
Gorgias
Yes, I have heard it; but what is the point of your quotation?
Socrates
I mean that, supposing the producers of those blessings which the maker of the catch commends namely, the doctor, the trainer, and the money-getter were to stand before you this moment, and the doctor first should say:
"Gorgias is deceiving you, Socrates for it is not his art, but mine, that deals with man's greatest good."
Then supposing I were to ask him: "And who are you, to say so?"
He would probably reply: "A doctor."
"Well, what do you mean?
That the work of your art is the greatest good?"
"What else, Socrates," I expect he would reply, "is health?
What greater good is there for men than health?"
And supposing the trainer came next and said: "I also should be surprised indeed, Socrates, if Gorgias could show you a greater good in his art than I can in mine."
Again I should say to him in his turn: "And who are you, sir? What is your work?"
"A trainer," he would reply, "and my work is making men's bodies beautiful and strong."
After the trainer would come the money-getter, saying with, I fancy, a fine contempt for every one:
"Pray consider, Socrates, if you can find a good that is greater than wealth, either in Gorgias' view or in that of anyone else at all."
"Why then," we should say to him, "are you a producer of that?"
"Yes," he would say.
"And who are you?"
"A money-getter."
"Well then," we shall say to him, "do you judge wealth to be the greatest good for men?"
"Of course," he will reply.
"But look here," we should say;
"our friend Gorgias contends that his own art is a cause of greater good than yours."
Then doubtless his next question would be: "And what is that good?
Let Gorgias answer."
Now come, Gorgias; imagine yourself being questioned by those persons and by me, and tell us what is this thing that you say is the greatest good for men, and that you claim to produce.
Gorgias
A thing, Socrates, which in truth is the greatest good, and a cause not merely of freedom to mankind at large, but also of dominion to single persons in their several cities.
Socrates
Well, and what do you call it?
Gorgias
I call it the ability to persuade with speeches either judges in the law courts or statesmen in the council-chamber or the commons in the Assembly or an audience at any other meeting that may be held on public affairs.
And I tell you that by virtue of this power you will have the doctor as your slave, and the trainer as your slave; your money-getter will turn out to be making money not for himself, but for another, in fact for you, who are able to speak and persuade the multitude.
Socrates
I think now, Gorgias, you have come very near to showing us the art of rhetoric as you conceive it, and if I at all take your meaning, you say that rhetoric is a producer of persuasion, and has therein its whole business and main consummation.
Or can you tell us of any other function it can have beyond that of effecting persuasion in the minds of an audience?
Gorgias
None at all, Socrates; your definition seems to me satisfactory; that is the main substance of the art.
Socrates
Then listen, Gorgias:
I, let me assure you, for so I persuade myself if ever there was a man who debated with another from a desire of knowing the truth of the subject discussed, I am such a man; and so, I trust, are you.
Gorgias
Well, what then, Socrates?
Socrates
I will now tell you.
What the real nature of the persuasion is that you speak of as resulting from rhetoric, and what the matters are with which persuasion deals, I assure you I do not clearly understand; though I may have my suspicions as to what I suppose you to mean by it, and with what things you think it deals.
But nevertheless I will ask you what you do mean by the persuasion that results from rhetoric, and with what matters you think it deals.
Now why is it that, having a suspicion of my own, I am going to ask you this, instead of stating it myself?
It is not on your account, but with a view to the argument, and to such a progress in it as may best reveal to us the point we are discussing.
Just see if you do not think it fair of me to press you with my question: suppose I happened to ask you what Zeuxis was among painters, and you said "a figure painter," would it not be fair of me to ask you what sort of figures he painted, and where?
Gorgias
Certainly.
Socrates
Would this be the reason that there are also other painters who depict a variety of other figures?
Gorgias
Yes.
Socrates
But if no one besides Zeuxis were a painter, your answer would have been right?
Gorgias
Yes, of course.
Socrates
Come then, tell me now about rhetoric: do you think rhetoric alone effects persuasion, or can other arts do it as well?
I mean, for example, when a man teaches anything, does he persuade in his teaching, or do you think not?
Gorgias
No, to be sure, Socrates, I think he most certainly does persuade.
Socrates
Then let us repeat our question with reference to the same arts that we spoke of just now: does not numeration, or the person skilled in numeration, teach us all that pertains to number?
Gorgias
Certainly.
Socrates
And persuades also?
Gorgias
Yes.
Socrates
So that numeration also is a producer of persuasion?
Gorgias
Apparently.
Socrates
Then if we are asked what kind of persuasion, and dealing with what, we shall reply, I suppose: The instructive kind, which deals with the amount of an odd or an even number; and we shall be able to demonstrate that all the other arts which we mentioned just now are producers of persuasion, and what kind it is, and what it deals with, shall we not?
Gorgias
Yes.
Socrates
Hence rhetoric is not the only producer of persuasion.
Gorgias
You are right.
Socrates
Since then it is not the only one that achieves this effect, but others can also, we should be justified in putting this further question to the speaker, as we did concerning the painter: Then of what kind of persuasion, and of persuasion dealing with what, is rhetoric the art?
Or do you not consider that such a further question would be justified?
Gorgias
Yes, I do.
Socrates
Then answer me, Gorgias, since you agree with me on that.
Gorgias
Well then, I mean that kind of persuasion, Socrates, which you find in the law-courts and in any public gatherings, as in fact I said just now; and it deals with what is just and unjust.
Socrates
I, too, I may tell you, had a suspicion that it was this persuasion that you meant, and as dealing with those things, Gorgias;
but you must not be surprised if I ask you by-and-by some such question as may seem to be obvious, though I persist in it; for, as I say, I ask my questions with a view to an orderly completion of our argument I am not aiming at you, but only anxious that we do not fall into a habit of snatching at each other's words with a hasty guess, and that you may complete your own statement in your own way, as the premises may allow.
Gorgias
And I think you are quite right in doing so, Socrates.
Socrates
Come then, let us consider another point.
Is there something that you call "having learnt."
Gorgias
There is.
Socrates
And again, "having believed"?
Gorgias
Yes.
Socrates
Then do you think that having learnt and having believed, or learning and belief, are the same thing, or different?
Gorgias
In my opinion, Socrates, they are different.
Socrates
And your opinion is right, as you can prove in this way:
if some one asked you Is there, Gorgias, a false and a true belief? you would say, Yes, I imagine.
Gorgias
I should.
Socrates
But now, is there a false and a true knowledge?
Gorgias
Surely not.
Socrates
So it is evident again that they are not the same.
Gorgias
You are right.
Socrates
But yet those who have learnt have been persuaded, as well as those who have believed.
Gorgias
That is so.
Socrates
Then would you have us assume two forms of persuasion one providing belief without knowledge, and the other sure knowledge?
Gorgias
Certainly.
Socrates
Now which kind of persuasion is it that rhetoric creates in law courts or any public meeting on matters of right and wrong?
The kind from which we get belief without knowledge, or that from which we get knowledge?
Gorgias
Obviously, I presume, Socrates, that from which we get belief.
Socrates
Thus rhetoric, it seems, is a producer of persuasion for belief, not for instruction in the matter of right and wrong.
Gorgias
Yes.
Socrates
And so the rhetorician's business is not to instruct a law court or a public meeting in matters of right and wrong, but only to make them believe; since, I take it, he could not in a short while instruct such a mass of people in matters so important.
Gorgias
No, to be sure.
Socrates
Come then, let us see what actually is our account of rhetoric:
for I confess I am not yet able to distinguish what my own account of it is.
When the city holds a meeting to appoint doctors or shipbuilders or any other set of craftsmen, there is no question then, is there, of the rhetorician giving advice?
And clearly this is because in each appointment we have to elect the most skillful person.
Again, in a case of building walls or constructing harbors or arsenals, our only advisers are the master-builders; or in consulting on the appointment of generals, or on a manoeuvre against the enemy, or on a military occupation, it is the general staff who will then advise us, and not the rhetoricians.
Or what do you say, Gorgias, to these instances?
For as you claim to be an orator yourself and to make orators of others, it is proper to inquire of you concerning your own craft.
And here you must regard me as furthering your own interest:
for it is quite likely that some one within these walls has a wish to become your pupil indeed I fancy I perceive more than one, yes, a number of them, who, perhaps, would be ashamed to press you with questions.
So, when you are being pressed with mine, consider that you are being questioned by them as well: "What shall we get, Gorgias, by coming to hear you?
On what matters shall we be enabled to give advice to the state?
Will it be only on right and wrong, or on those things besides which Socrates was mentioning just now?
So try to give them an answer.
Gorgias
Well, I will try, Socrates, to reveal to you clearly the whole power of rhetoric: and in fact you have correctly shown the way to it yourself.
You know, I suppose, that these great arsenals and walls of Athens, and the construction of your harbors, are due to the advice of Themistocles, and in part to that of Pericles, not to your craftsmen.
Socrates
So we are told, Gorgias, of Themistocles; and as to Pericles, I heard him myself when he was advising us about the middle wall.
Gorgias
So whenever there is an election of such persons as you were referring to, Socrates, you see it is the orators who give the advice and get resolutions carried in these matters.
Socrates
That is just what surprises me, Gorgias, and has made me ask you all this time what in the world the power of rhetoric can be.
For, viewed in this light, its greatness comes over me as something supernatural.
Gorgias
Ah yes, if you knew all, Socrates, how it comprises in itself practically all powers at once!
And I will tell you a striking proof of this: many and many a time have I gone with my brother or other doctors to visit one of their patients, and found him unwilling either to take medicine or submit to the surgeon's knife or cautery; and when the doctor failed to persuade him I succeeded, by no other art than that of rhetoric.
And I further declare that, if a rhetorician and a doctor were to enter any city you please, and there had to contend in speech before the Assembly or some other meeting as to which of the two should be appointed physician, you would find the physician was nowhere, while the master of speech would be appointed if he wished.
And if he had to contend with a member of any other profession whatsoever, the rhetorician would persuade the meeting to appoint him before anyone else in the place: for there is no subject on which the rhetorician could not speak more persuasively than a member of any other profession whatsoever, before a multitude.
So great, so strange, is the power of this art.
At the same time, Socrates, our use of rhetoric should be like our use of any other sort of exercise.
For other exercises are not to be used against all and sundry, just because one has learnt boxing or wrestling or fighting in armour so well as to vanquish friend and foe alike: this gives one no right to strike one's friends, or stab them to death.
Nor, in all conscience, if a man took lessons at a wrestling-school, and having got himself into good condition and learnt boxing he proceeded to strike his father and mother, or some other of his relations or friends, should that be a reason for hating athletic trainers and teachers of fighting in armour, and expelling them from our cities.
For they imparted their skill with a view to its rightful use against enemies and wrongdoers, in self-defence, not provocation; whereas the others have perverted their strength and art to an improper use.
So it is not the teachers who are wicked, nor is the art either guilty or wicked on this account, but rather, to my thinking, those who do not use it properly.
Now the same argument applies also to rhetoric:
for the orator is able, indeed, to speak against every one and on every question in such a way as to win over the votes of the multitude, practically in any matter he may choose to take up: but he is no whit the more entitled to deprive the doctors of their credit, just because he could do so, or other professionals of theirs; he must use his rhetoric fairly, as in the case of athletic exercise.
And, in my opinion, if a man becomes a rhetorician and then uses this power and this art unfairly, we ought not to hate his teacher and cast him out of our cities.
For he imparted that skill to be used in all fairness, whilst this man puts it to an opposite use.
Thus it is the man who does not use it alright who deserves to be hated and expelled and put to death, and not his teacher.
Socrates
I expect, Gorgias, that you as well as I have had no small practice in arguments, and have observed the following fact about them, that it is not easy for people to define to each other the matters which they take in hand to discuss, and to make such exchange of instruction as will fairly bring their debate to an end:
no, if they find that some point is in dispute between them, and one of them says that the other is speaking incorrectly or obscurely, they are annoyed and think the remark comes from jealousy of themselves, and in a spirit of contention rather than of inquiry into the matter proposed for discussion.
In some cases, indeed, they end by making a most disgraceful scene, with such abusive expressions on each side that the rest of the company are vexed on their own account that they allowed themselves to listen to such fellows.
Well, what is my reason for saying this?
It is because your present remarks do not seem to me quite in keeping or accord with what you said at first about rhetoric.
Now I am afraid to refute you, lest you imagine I am contentiously neglecting the point and its elucidation, and merely attacking you.
I therefore, if you are a person of the same sort as myself, should be glad to continue questioning you: if not, I can let it drop.
Of what sort am I?
One of those who would be glad to be refuted if I say anything untrue, and glad to refute anyone else who might speak untruly; but just as glad, mind you, to be refuted as to refute, since I regard the former as the greater benefit, in proportion as it is a greater benefit for oneself to be delivered from the greatest evil than to deliver some one else.
For I consider that a man cannot suffer any evil so great as a false opinion on the subjects of our actual argument.
Now if you say that you too are of that sort, let us go on with the conversation; but if you think we had better drop it, let us have done with it at once and make an end of the discussion.
Gorgias
Nay, I too, Socrates, claim to be of the sort you indicate; though perhaps we should have taken thought also for the wishes of our company.
For, let me tell you, some time before you and your friend arrived, I gave the company a performance of some length; and if we now have this conversation I expect we shall seriously protract our sitting.
We ought, therefore, to consider their wishes as well, in case we are detaining any of them who may want to do something else.
Chaerephon
You hear for yourselves, Gorgias and Socrates, the applause by which these gentlemen show their desire to hear anything you may say; for my own part, however, Heaven forbid that I should ever be so busy as to give up a discussion so interesting and so conducted, because I found it more important to attend to something else.
Callicles
Yes, by all that's holy, Chaerephon; and let me say, moreover, for myself that among the many discussions which I have attended in my time I doubt if there was one that gave me such delight as this present one.
So, for my part, I shall count it a favor even if you choose to continue it all day long.
Socrates
Why, Callicles, I assure you there is no hindrance on my side, if Gorgias is willing.
Gorgias
After that, Socrates, it would be shameful indeed if I were unwilling, when it was I who challenged everybody to ask what questions they pleased.
But if our friends here are so minded, go on with the conversation and ask me anything you like.
Socrates
Hark you then, Gorgias, to what surprises me in your statements: to be sure, you may possibly be right, and I may take your meaning wrongly.
You say you are able to make a rhetorician of any man who chooses to learn from you?
Gorgias
Yes.
Socrates
Now, do you mean, to make him carry conviction to the crowd on all subjects, not by teaching them, but by persuading?
Gorgias
Certainly I do.
Socrates
You were saying just now, you know, that even in the matter of health the orator will be more convincing than the doctor.
Gorgias
Yes, indeed, I was meaning, to the crowd.
Socrates
And "to the crowd" means "to the ignorant?"
For surely, to those who know, he will not be more convincing than the doctor.
Gorgias
You are right.
Socrates
And if he is to be more convincing than the doctor, he thus becomes more convincing than he who knows?
Gorgias
Certainly.
Socrates
Though not himself a doctor, you agree?
Gorgias
Yes.
Socrates
But he who is not a doctor is surely without knowledge of that whereof the doctor has knowledge.
Gorgias
Clearly.
Socrates
So he who does not know will be more convincing to those who do not know than he who knows, supposing the orator to be more convincing than the doctor.
Is that, or something else, the consequence?
Gorgias
In this case it does follow.
Socrates
Then the case is the same in all the other arts for the orator and his rhetoric: there is no need to know the truth of the actual matters, but one merely needs to have discovered some device of persuasion which will make one appear to those who do not know to know better than those who know.
Gorgias
Well, and is it not a great convenience, Socrates, to make oneself a match for the professionals by learning just this single art and omitting all the others?
Socrates
Whether the orator is or is not a match for the rest of them by reason of that skill, is a question we shall look into presently, if our argument so requires: for the moment let us consider first whether the rhetorician is in the same relation to what is just and unjust, base and noble, good and bad, as to what is healthful, and to the various objects of all the other arts; he does not know what is really good or bad, noble or base, just or unjust, but he has devised a persuasion to deal with these matters so as to appear to those who, like himself, do not know to know better than he who knows.
Or is it necessary to know, and must anyone who intends to learn rhetoric have a previous knowledge of these things when he comes to you?
Or if not, are you, as the teacher of rhetoric, to teach the person who comes to you nothing about them for it is not your business but only to make him appear in the eyes of the multitude to know things of this sort when he does not know, and to appear to be good when he is not?
Or will you be utterly unable to teach him rhetoric unless he previously knows the truth about these matters?
Or what is the real state of the case, Gorgias?
For Heaven's sake, as you proposed just now, draw aside the veil and tell us what really is the function of rhetoric.
Gorgias
Why, I suppose, Socrates, if he happens not to know these things he will learn them too from me.
Socrates
Stop there: I am glad of that statement.
If you make a man a rhetorician he must needs know what is just and unjust either previously or by learning afterwards from you.
Gorgias
Quite so.
Socrates
Well now, a man who has learnt building is a builder, is he not?
Gorgias
Yes.
Socrates
And he who has learnt music, a musician?
Gorgias
Yes.
Socrates
Then he who has learnt medicine is a medical man?
and so on with the rest on the same principle; anyone who has learnt a certain art has the qualification acquired by his particular knowledge?
Gorgias
Certainly.
Socrates
And so, on this principle, he who has learnt what is just is just?
Gorgias
Absolutely, I presume.
Socrates
And the just man, I suppose, does what is just.
Gorgias
Yes.
Socrates
Now the just man must wish to do what is just?
Gorgias
Apparently.
Socrates
Hence the just man will never wish to act unjustly?
Gorgias
That must needs be so.
Socrates
But it follows from our statements that the rhetorician must be just.
Gorgias
Yes.
Socrates
Hence the rhetorician will never wish to do wrong.
Gorgias
Apparently not.
Socrates
Then do you remember saying a little while ago that we ought not to complain against the trainers or expel them from our cities, if a boxer makes not merely use, but an unfair use, of his boxing?
So in just the same way, if an orator uses his rhetoric unfairly, we should not complain against his teacher or banish him from our city, but the man who does the wrong and misuses his rhetoric.
Was that said or not?
Gorgias
It was.
Socrates
But now we find that this very person, the rhetorician, could never be guilty of wrongdoing, do we not?
Gorgias
We do.
Socrates
And in our first statements, Gorgias, we said that rhetoric dealt with speech, not on even and odd, but on the just and unjust, did we not?
Gorgias
Yes.
Socrates
Well then, I supposed at the time when you were saying this that rhetoric could never be an unjust thing,
since the speeches it made were always about justice but when a little later you told us that the orator might make even an unjust use of his rhetoric, that indeed surprised me, and thinking the two statements were not in accord I made those proposals, that if, like myself, you counted it a gain to be refuted, it was worth while to have the discussion, but if not, we had better have done with it.
And now that we have come to examine the matter, you see for yourself that we agree once more that it is impossible for the rhetorician to use his rhetoric unjustly or consent to do wrong.
Now, to distinguish properly which way the truth of the matter lies will require, by the Dog, Gorgias, no short sitting.
Polus
How is this, Socrates?
Is that really your opinion of rhetoric, as you now express it?
Or, think you, because Gorgias was ashamed not to admit your point that the rhetorician knows what is just and noble and good, and will himself teach these to anyone who comes to him without knowing them; and then from this admission I daresay there followed some inconsistency in the statements made the result that you are so fond of when it was yourself who led him into that set of questions!
For who do you think will deny that he has a knowledge of what is just and can also teach it to others?
I call it very bad taste to lead the discussion in such a direction.
Socrates
Ah, sweet Polus, of course it is for this very purpose we possess ourselves of companions and sons, that when the advance of years begins to make us stumble, you younger ones may be at hand to set our lives upright again in words as well as deeds.
So now if Gorgias and I are stumbling in our words, you are to stand by and set us up again it is only your duty; and for my part I am willing to revoke at your pleasure anything that you think has been wrongly admitted, if you will kindly observe one condition.
Polus
What do you mean by that?
Socrates
That you keep a check on that lengthy way of speaking, Polus, which you tried to employ at first.
Polus
Why, shall I not be at liberty to say as much as I like?
Socrates
It would indeed be a hard fate for you, my excellent friend, if having come to Athens, where there is more freedom of speech than anywhere in Greece, you should be the one person there who could not enjoy it.
But as a set-off to that, I ask you if it would not be just as hard on me, while you spoke at length and refused to answer my questions, not to be free to go away and avoid listening to you.
No, if you have any concern for the argument that we have carried on, and care to set it on its feet again, revoke whatever you please, as I suggested just now; take your turn in questioning and being questioned, like me and Gorgias; and thus either refute or be refuted.
For you claim, I understand, that you yourself know all that Gorgias knows, do you not?
Polus
I do.
Socrates
Then are you with him also in bidding us ask at each point any questions we like of you, as one who knows how to answer?
Polus
Certainly I am.
Socrates
So now, take whichever course you like: either put questions, or answer them.
Polus
Well, I will do as you say.
So answer me this, Socrates: since you think that Gorgias is at a loss about rhetoric, what is your own account of it?
Socrates
Are you asking what art I call it?
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
None at all, I consider, Polus, if you would have the honest truth.
Polus
But what do you consider rhetoric to be?
Socrates
A thing which you say in the treatise which I read of late "made art."
Polus
What thing do you mean?
Socrates
I mean a certain habitude.
Polus
Then do you take rhetoric to be a habitude?
Socrates
I do, if you have no other suggestion.
Polus
Habitude of what?
Socrates
Of producing a kind of gratification and pleasure.
Polus
Then you take rhetoric to be something fine an ability to gratify people?
Socrates
How now, Polus?
Have you as yet heard me tell you what I say it is, that you ask what should follow that whether I do not take it to be fine?
Polus
Why, did I not hear you call it a certain habitude?
Socrates
Then please since you value "gratification" be so good as gratify me in a small matter.
Polus
I will.
Socrates
Ask me now what art I take cookery to be.
Polus
Then I ask you, what art is cookery?
Socrates
None at all, Polus.
Polus
Well, what is it ?
Tell me.
Socrates
Then I reply, a certain habitude.
Polus
Of what?
Tell me.
Socrates
Then I reply, of production of gratification and pleasure, Polus.
Polus
So cookery and rhetoric are the same thing?
Socrates
Not at all, only parts of the same practice.
Polus
What practice do you mean?
Socrates
I fear it may be too rude to tell the truth; for I shrink from saying it on Gorgias' account, lest he suppose I am making satirical fun of his own profession.
Yet indeed I do not know whether this is the rhetoric which Gorgias practices, for from our argument just now we got no very clear view as to how he conceives it; but what I call rhetoric is a part of a certain business which has nothing fine about it.
Gorgias
What is that, Socrates?
Tell us, without scruple on my account.
Socrates
It seems to me then, Gorgias, to be a pursuit that is not a matter of art, but showing a shrewd, gallant spirit which has a natural bent for clever dealing with mankind, and I sum up its substance in the name flattery.
This practice, as I view it, has many branches, and one of them is cookery;
which appears indeed to be an art but, by my account of it, is not an art but a habitude or knack.
I call rhetoric another branch of it, as also personal adornment and sophistry four branches of it for four kinds of affairs.
So if Polus would inquire, let him inquire:
he has not yet been informed to what sort of branch of flattery I assign rhetoric; but without noticing that I have not yet answered that, he proceeds to ask whether I do not consider it a fine thing.
But I am not going to reply to the question whether I consider rhetoric a fine or a base thing, until I have first answered what it is;
for it would not be fair, Polus: but if you want the information, ask me what sort of branch of flattery I assert rhetoric to be.
Polus
I ask you then; so answer, what sort of branch it is.
Socrates
Now, will you understand when I answer?
Rhetoric, by my account, is a semblance of a branch of politics.
Polus
Well then, do you call it a fine or a base thing?
Socrates
A base one, I call it for all that is bad I call base since I am to answer you as though you had already understood my meaning.
Gorgias
Nor do I myself, upon my word, Socrates, grasp your meaning either.
Socrates
And no wonder, Gorgias, for as yet my statement is not at all clear; but Polus here is so young and fresh!
Gorgias
Ah, do not mind him; but tell me what you mean by rhetoric being a semblance of a branch of politics.
Socrates
Well, I will try to express what rhetoric appears to me to be: if it is not in fact what I say, Polus here will refute me.
There are things, I suppose, that you call body and soul?
Gorgias
Of course.
Socrates
And each of these again you believe to have a good condition?
Gorgias
I do.
Socrates
And again, a good condition that may seem so, but is not?
As an example, let me give the following: many people seem to be in good bodily condition when it would not be easy for anyone but a doctor, or one of the athletic trainers, to perceive that they are not so.
Gorgias
You are right.
Socrates
Something of this sort I say there is in body and in soul, which makes the body or the soul seem to be in good condition, though it is none the more so in fact.
Gorgias
Quite so.
Socrates
Now let me see if I can explain my meaning to you more clearly.
There are two different affairs to which I assign two different arts:
the one, which has to do with the soul, I call politics; the other, which concerns the body, though I cannot give you a single name for it offhand, is all one business, the tendance of the body, which I can designate in two branches as gymnastic and medicine.
Under politics I set legislation in the place of gymnastic, and justice to match medicine.
In each of these pairs, of course medicine and gymnastic, justice and legislation there is some intercommunication, as both deal with the same thing; at the same time they have certain differences.
Now these four, which always bestow their care for the best advantage respectively of the body and the soul, are noticed by the art of flattery which, I do not say with knowledge, but by speculation, divides herself into four parts, and then, insinuating herself into each of those branches, pretends to be that into which she has crept,
and cares nothing for what is the best, but dangles what is most pleasant for the moment as a bait for folly, and deceives it into thinking that she is of the highest value.
Thus cookery assumes the form of medicine, and pretends to know what foods are best for the body; so that if a cook and a doctor had to contend before boys, or before men as foolish as boys, as to which of the two, the doctor or the cook, understands the question of sound and noxious foods, the doctor would starve to death.
Flattery, however, is what I call it, and I say that this sort of thing is a disgrace, Polus for here I address you because it aims at the pleasant and ignores the best; and I say it is not an art, but a habitude, since it has no account to give of the real nature of the things it applies, and so cannot tell the cause of any of them.
I refuse to give the name of art to anything that is irrational:
if you dispute my views, I am ready to give my reasons.
However, as I put it, cookery is flattery disguised as medicine; and in just the same manner self-adornment personates gymnastic: with its rascally, deceitful, ignoble, and illiberal nature it deceives men by forms and colors, polish and dress so as to make them, in the effort of assuming an extraneous beauty, neglect the native sort that comes through gymnastic.
Well, to avoid prolixity, I am willing to put it to you like a geometer for by this time I expect you can follow me: as self-adornment is to gymnastic, so is sophistry to legislation; and as cookery is to medicine, so is rhetoric to justice.
But although, as I say, there is this natural distinction between them, they are so nearly related that sophists and orators are jumbled up as having the same field and dealing with the same subjects, and neither can they tell what to make of each other, nor the world at large what to make of them.
For indeed, if the soul were not in command of the body, but the latter had charge of itself, and so cookery and medicine were not surveyed and distinguished by the soul, but the body itself were the judge, forming its own estimate of them by the gratifications they gave it, we should have a fine instance of what Anaxagoras described, my dear Polus,
for you are versed in these matters: everything would be jumbled together, without distinction as between medicinal and healthful and tasty concoctions.
Well now, you have heard what I state rhetoric to be the counterpart of cookery in the soul, acting here as that does on the body.
It may, indeed, be absurd of me, when I do not allow you to make long speeches, to have extended mine to so considerable a length.
However, I can fairly claim indulgence: for when I spoke briefly you did not understand me; you were unable to make any use of the answer I gave you, but required a full exposition.
Now if I on my part cannot tell what use to make of any answers you may give me, you shall extend your speech also; but if I can make some use of them, allow me to do it; that will only be fair.
And now, if you can make any use of this answer of mine, do so.
Polus
Then what is it you say?
Do you take rhetoric to be flattery?
Socrates
Well, I said rather a branch of flattery.
Why, at your age, Polus, have you no memory?
What will you do later on?
Polus
Then do you think that good orators are considered to be flatterers in their cities, and so worthless?
Socrates
Is that a question you are asking, or are you beginning a speech?
Polus
I am asking a question.
Socrates
To my mind, they are not considered at all.
Polus
How not considered?
Have they not the chief power in their cities?
Socrates
No, if you mean power in the sense of something good for him who has it.
Polus
Why, of course I mean that.
Socrates
Then, to my thinking, the orators have the smallest power of all who are in their city.
Polus
What, are they not like the despots, in putting to death anyone they please, and depriving anyone of his property and expelling him from their cities as they may think fit?
Socrates
By the Dog, I fear I am still in two minds, Polus, at everything you say, as to whether this is a statement on your own part, and a declaration of your own opinion, or a question you are putting to me.
Polus
Why, I am asking you.
Socrates
Very well, my friend then are you asking me two things at once?
Polus
How two?
Socrates
Were you not this moment saying something like this: Is it not the case that the orators put to death anyone they wish, like the despots, and deprive people of property and expel them from their cities as they may think fit?
Polus
I was.
Socrates
Then I tell you that there are two questions here, and I will give you answers to them both.
For I say, Polus, that the orators and the despots alike have the least power in their cities, as I stated just now; since they do nothing that they wish to do, practically speaking, though they do whatever they think to be best.
Polus
Well, and is not that a great power to have?
Socrates
No, judging at least by what Polus says.
Polus
I say no!
Pardon me, I say yes.
Socrates
No, by the, you do not; for you said that great power is a good to him who has it.
Polus
Yes, and I maintain it.
Socrates
Then do you regard it as a good, when a man does what he thinks to be best, without having intelligence?
Is that what you call having a great power?
Polus
No, I do not.
Socrates
Then will you prove that the orators have intelligence, and that rhetoric is an art, not a flattery, and so refute me ?
Else, if you are going to leave me unrefuted, the orators who do what they think fit in their cities, and the despots, will find they have got no good in doing that, if indeed power is, as you say, a good, but doing what one thinks fit without intelligence is as you yourself admit, do you not? an evil.
Polus
Yes, I do.
Socrates
How then can the orators or the despots have great power in their cities, unless Socrates is refuted by Polus, and admits that they do what they wish?
Polus
Hark at the man !
Socrates
I deny that they do what they wish: there, refute me.
Polus
Did you not admit just now that they do what they think best?
Socrates
Yes, and I admit it now.
Polus
Then do they not do what they wish?
Socrates
I say no.
Polus
When they do what they think fit?
Socrates
Yes.
Polus
What shocking, nay, monstrous answers, Socrates!
Socrates
Spare your invective, peerless Polus if I may address you in your own style: but if you have a question to ask me, expose my error otherwise, make answer yourself.
Polus
Well, I am ready to answer, in order that I may know what you mean.
Socrates
Then is it your view that people wish merely that which they do each time, or that which is the object of their doing what they do?
For instance, do those who take medicine by doctor's orders wish, in your opinion, merely what they do, to take the medicine and suffer the pain of it, or rather to be healthy, which is the object of their taking it?
Polus
To be healthy, without a doubt.
Socrates
And so with seafarers and such as pursue profit generally in trade; what they wish is not what they are doing at each moment for who wishes to go on a voyage, and incur all its danger and trouble?
It is rather, I conceive, the object of their voyage to get wealth; since it is for wealth that they go on it.
Polus
Certainly.
Socrates
And is it not just the same in every case?
If a man does something for an object, he does not wish the thing that he does, but the thing for which he does it.
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
Now is there any existent thing that is not either good or bad or between these neither good nor bad?
Polus
Most assuredly nothing, Socrates.
Socrates
Well, do you call wisdom and health and wealth and everything else of that kind good, and their opposites bad?
Polus
I do.
Socrates
And by things neither good nor bad do you mean such things as sometimes partake of the good, sometimes of the bad, and sometimes of neither for example, sitting, walking, running, and sailing, or again, stones and sticks and anything else of that sort?
These are what you mean, are they not?
Or are there other things that you describe as neither good nor bad?
Polus
No, these are what I mean.
Socrates
Then do people do these intermediate things, when they do them, for the sake of the good things, or the good things for the intermediate?
Polus
The intermediate, I presume, for the good.
Socrates
Thus it is in pursuit of the good that we walk, when we walk, conceiving it to be better; or on the contrary, stand, when we stand, for the sake of the same thing, the good: is it not so?
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
And so we put a man to death, if we do put him to death, or expel him or deprive him of his property, because we think it better for us to do this than not?
Polus
Certainly.
Socrates
So it is for the sake of the good that the doers of all these things do them?
Polus
I agree.
Socrates
And we have admitted that when we do things for an object, we do not wish those things, but the object for which we do them?
Polus
Quite so.
Socrates
Then we do not wish to slaughter people or expel them from our cities or deprive them of their property as an act in itself, but if these things are beneficial we wish to do them, while if they are harmful, we do not wish them.
For we wish what is good, as you say; but what is neither good nor bad we do not wish, nor what is bad either, do we?
Is what I say true in your opinion, Polus, or not?
Why do you not answer?
Polus
It is true.
Socrates
Then, as we agree on this, if a man puts anyone to death or expels him from a city or deprives him of his property, whether he does it as a despot or an orator, because he thinks it better for himself though it is really worse, that man, I take it, does what he thinks fit, does he not?
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
Now is it also what he wishes, supposing it to be really bad?
Why do you not answer?
Polus
No, I do not think he does what he wishes.
Socrates
Can such a man then be said to have great power in that city, if to have great power is something good, according to your admission?
Polus
He cannot.
Socrates
Then I spoke the truth when I said that it is possible for a man to do what he thinks fit in a city and yet not to have great power nor to do what he wishes.
Polus
As if you, Socrates, would not accept the liberty of doing what you think fit in your city rather than not, and would not envy a man whom you observed to have put some one to death as he thought fit, or deprived him of his property or sent him to prison!
Socrates
Justly, do you mean, or unjustly?
Polus
Whichever way he does it, is it not enviable in either case?
Socrates
Hush, Polus!
Polus
Why?
Socrates
Because we ought not to envy either the unenviable or the wretched, but pity them.
Polus
What, is that the state in which you consider those people, of whom I speak, to be?
Socrates
Yes, for so I must.
Polus
Then do you consider that a man who puts another to death as he thinks fit, and justly puts him to death, is wretched and pitiable?
Socrates
Not I; but not enviable either.
Polus
Did you not say just now that he was wretched?
Socrates
Only he who unjustly put some one to death, my friend, and I called him pitiable as well: if he acted justly, then he is unenviable.
Polus
I suppose, at any rate, the man who is put to death unjustly is both pitiable and wretched.
Socrates
Less so than he who puts him to death, Polus, and less so than he who is put to death justly.
Polus
In what way can that be, Socrates ?
Socrates
In this, that to do wrong is the greatest of evils.
Polus
What, is this the greatest?
Is not to suffer wrong a greater?
Socrates
By no means.
Polus
Then would you wish rather to suffer wrong than to do it?
Socrates
I should wish neither, for my own part; but if it were necessary either to do wrong or to suffer it, I should choose to suffer rather than do it.
Polus
Then you would not accept a despot's power?
Socrates
No, if you mean by a despot's power the same as I do.
Polus
Why, what I mean is, as I did just now, the liberty of doing anything one thinks fit in one's city putting people to death and expelling them and doing everything at one's own discretion.
Socrates
My gifted friend, let me speak, and you shall take me to task in your turn.
Suppose that in a crowded market I should hide a dagger under my arm and then say to you:
"Polus, I have just acquired, by a wonderful chance, the power of a despot; for if I should think fit that one of those people whom you see there should die this very instant, a dead man he will be, just as I think fit; or if I think fit that one of them shall have his head broken, broken it will be immediately; or to have his cloak torn in pieces, torn it will be: so great is my power in this city."
Then suppose that on your disbelieving this I showed you my dagger;
I expect when you saw it you would say: "Socrates, at this rate every one would have great power, for any house you thought fit might be set ablaze on these methods, and the Athenian arsenals also, and the men-of-war and all the rest of the shipping, both public and private."
But surely this is not what it is to have great power merely doing what one thinks fit.
Or do you think it is?
Polus
Oh no, not in that way.
Socrates
Then can you tell me why you disapprove of this kind of power?
Polus
I can.
Socrates
Why, then?
Tell me.
Polus
Because it is inevitable that he who acts thus will be punished.
Socrates
And is it not a bad thing to be punished?
Polus
Certainly.
Socrates
So, my remarkable friend, you have come round again to the view that if doing what one thinks fit is attended by advantage in doing it, this is not merely a good thing but at the same time, it seems, the possession of great power; otherwise it is a bad thing and means little power.
And let us consider another point besides; do we not admit that sometimes it is better to do those things that we were mentioning just now to put people to death and banish them and deprive them of property while sometimes it is not?
Polus
To be sure.
Socrates
Then here is a point, it seems, that is admitted both on your side and on mine.
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
Then when do you say it is better to do these things?
Tell me where you draw the line.
Polus
Nay, I would rather that you, Socrates, answered that.
Socrates
Well then I say, Polus, if you prefer to hear it from me, that it is better when these things are done justly, and worse when unjustly.
Polus
So hard to refute you, Socrates!
Nay, a mere child could do it, could he not, and prove your words are untrue?
Socrates
Then I shall be most grateful to the child, and equally to you, if you refute me and rid me of foolery.
Come, do not grow weary in well-doing towards your friend, but refute me.
Polus
Well, to be sure, Socrates, there is no need to refute you with ancient instances; for those happenings of but a day or two ago are enough to refute you, and prove that many a wrongdoer is happy.
Socrates
What sort of thing do you mean?
Polus
I suppose you see that Archelaus, son of Perdiccas, is ruler of Macedonia?
Socrates
Well, if I do not, at any rate I hear it.
Polus
Do you consider him happy or wretched?
Socrates
I do not know, Polus; I have never met the man.
Polus
What, could you find out by meeting him, and cannot otherwise tell, straight off, that he is happy?
Socrates
No, indeed, upon my word.
Polus
Then doubtless you will say, Socrates, that you do not know that even the Great King is happy.
Socrates
Yes, and I shall be speaking the truth; for I do not know how he stands in point of education and justice.
Polus
Why, does happiness entirely consist in that?
Socrates
Yes, by my account, Polus; for a good and honorable man or woman, I say, is happy, and an unjust and wicked one is wretched.
Polus
Then this Archelaus, on your statement, is wretched?
Socrates
Yes, my friend, supposing he is unjust.
Polus
Well, but how can he be other than unjust?
He had no claim to the throne which he now occupies, being the son of a woman who was a slave of Perdiccas' brother Alcetas, and in mere justice he was Alcetas' slave; and if he wished to do what is just, he would be serving Alcetas and would be happy, by your account; but, as it is, he has become a prodigy of wretchedness, since he has done the most enormous wrong.
First of all he invited this very master and uncle of his to his court, as if he were going to restore to him the kingdom of which Perdiccas had deprived him; and after entertaining him and his son Alexander his own cousin, about the same age as himself and making them drunk, he packed them into a carriage, drove them away by night, and murdered and made away with them both.
And after all these iniquities he failed to observe that he had become a most wretched person and had no repentance, but a while later he refused to make himself happy by bringing up, as he was justly bound, his brother, the legitimate son of Perdiccas, a boy about seven years old who had a just title to the throne, and restoring the kingdom to him; but he cast him into a well and drowned him, and then told his mother Cleopatra that he had fallen in and lost his life while chasing a goose.
So now, you see, as the greatest wrongdoer in Macedonia, he is the most wretched of all the Macedonians, not the happiest; and I daresay some Athenians could be found who would join you in preferring to change places with any other Macedonian of them all, rather than with Archelaus!
Socrates
At the beginning of our discussion, Polus, I complimented you on having had, as I consider, a good training in rhetoric, while you seem to have neglected disputation; and now, accordingly, this is the argument, is it, with which any child could refute me?
By this statement, you think, I now stand refuted at your hands, when I assert that the wrongdoer is not happy?
How so, my good friend?
Why, I tell you I do not admit a single point in what you say.
Polus
No, because you do not want to; for you really agree with my statement.
Socrates
My gifted friend, that is because you attempt to refute me in rhetorical fashion, as they understand refuting in the law courts.
For there, one party is supposed to refute the other when they bring forward a number of reputable witnesses to any statements they may make, whilst their opponent produces only one, or none.
But this sort of refutation is quite worthless for getting at the truth; since occasionally a man may actually be crushed by the number and reputation of the false witnesses brought against him.
And so now you will find almost everybody, Athenians and foreigners,
in agreement with you on the points you state, if you like to bring forward witnesses against the truth of what I say: if you like, there is Nicias, son of Niceratus, with his brothers, whose tripods are standing in a row in the Dionysium; or else Aristocrates, son of Scellias, whose goodly offering again is well known at Delphi; or if you choose, there is the whole house of Pericles or any other family you may like to select in this place.
But I, alone here before you, do not admit it, for you fail to convince me: you only attempt, by producing a number of false witnesses against me, to oust me from my reality, the truth.
But if on my part I fail to produce yourself as my one witness to confirm what I say, I consider I have achieved nothing of any account towards the matter of our discussion, whatever it may be; nor have you either, I conceive, unless I act alone as your one witness, and you have nothing to do with all these others.
Well now, this is one mode of refutation, as you and many other people understand it; but there is also another which I on my side understand.
Let us therefore compare them with each other and consider if there is a difference between them.
For indeed the points which we have at issue are by no means of slight importance: rather, one might say, they are matters on which it is most honorable to have knowledge, and most disgraceful to lack it; for in sum they involve our knowing or not knowing who is happy and who is not.
To start at once with the point we are now debating, you consider it possible for a man to be happy while doing wrong, and as a wrongdoer, since you regard Archelaus as a wrongdoer, and yet happy.
We are to conclude, are we not, that this is your opinion?
Polus
Certainly.
Socrates
And I say it is impossible.
There we have one point at issue.
Very good but then, will a man be happy in wrongdoing if he comes in for requital and punishment?
Polus
Not at all, since in that case he would be most wretched.
Socrates
But if the wrongdoer escapes requital, by your account he will be happy?
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
Whereas in my opinion, Polus, the wrongdoer or the unjust is wretched anyhow; more wretched, however, if he does not pay the penalty and gets no punishment for his wrongdoing, but less wretched if he pays the penalty and meets with requital from gods and men.
Polus
What a strange doctrine, Socrates, you are trying to maintain!
Socrates
Yes, and I will endeavor to make you too, my friend, maintain it with me: for I count you as a friend.
Well now, these are the points on which we differ; just examine them yourself.
I think I told you at an earlier stage that wrongdoing was worse than being wronged.
Polus
Certainly you did.
Socrates
And you thought that being wronged was worse.
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
And I said that wrongdoers were wretched, and I was refuted by you.
Polus
Upon my word, yes.
Socrates
At least to your thinking, Polus.
Polus
Yes, and true thinking too.
Socrates
Perhaps.
But you said, on the other hand, that wrongdoers are happy, if they pay no penalty.
Polus
Certainly.
Socrates
Whereas I say they are most wretched, and those who pay the penalty, less so.
Do you wish to refute that as well?
Polus
Why, that is still harder to refute, Socrates, than the other!
Socrates
Not merely so, Polus, but impossible; for the truth is never refuted.
Polus
How do you mean?
If a man be caught criminally plotting to make himself a despot, and he be straightway put on the rack and castrated and have his eyes burnt out, and after suffering himself, and seeing inflicted on his wife and children, a number of grievous torments of every kind, he be finally crucified or burnt in a coat of pitch, will he be happier than if he escape and make himself despot, and pass his life as the ruler in his city, doing whatever he likes,
and envied and congratulated by the citizens and the foreigners besides?
Impossible, do you tell me, to refute that?
Socrates
You are trying to make my flesh creep this time, my spirited Polus, instead of refuting me; a moment ago you were for calling witnesses.
However, please refresh my memory a little:
"criminally plotting to make himself a despot," you said?
Polus
I did.
Socrates
Then neither of them will ever be happier than the other neither he who has unjustly compassed the despotic power, nor he who pays the penalty; for of two wretched persons neither can be happier; but still more wretched is he who goes scot-free and establishes himself as despot.
What is that I see, Polus?
You are laughing?
Here we have yet another form of refutation when a statement is made, to laugh it down, instead of disproving it!
Polus
Do you not think yourself utterly refuted, Socrates, when you make such statements as nobody in the world would assent to?
You have only to ask anyone of the company here.
Socrates
Polus, I am not one of your statesmen: indeed, last year, when I was elected a member of the Council, and, as my tribe held the Presidency, I had to put a question to the vote, I got laughed at for not understanding the procedure.
So do not call upon me again to take the votes of the company now; but if, as I said this moment, you have no better disproof than those, hand the work over to me in my turn, and try the sort of refutation that I think the case requires.
For I know how to produce one witness in support of my statements, and that is the man himself with whom I find myself arguing; the many I dismiss: there is also one whose vote I know how to take, whilst to the multitude I have not a word to say.
See therefore if you will consent to be put to the proof in your turn by answering my questions.
For I think, indeed, that you and I and the rest of the world believe that doing wrong is worse than suffering it, and escaping punishment worse than incurring it.
Polus
And I, that neither I nor anyone else in the world believes it.
You, it seems, would choose rather to suffer wrong than to do it.
Socrates
Yes, and so would you and everyone else.
Polus
Far from it neither; I nor you nor anybody else.
Socrates
Then will you answer?
Polus
To be sure I will, for indeed I am eager to know what on earth you will say.
Socrates
Well then, so that you may know, tell me, just as though I were asking you all over again, which of the two seems to you, Polus, to be the worse doing wrong or suffering it?
Polus
Suffering it, I say.
Socrates
Now again, which is fouler doing wrong or suffering it?
Answer.
Polus
Doing it.
Socrates
And also more evil, if fouler.
Polus
Not at all.
Socrates
I see: you hold, apparently, that fair and good are not the same, nor evil and foul.
Polus
Just so.
Socrates
But what of this?
All fair things, like bodies and colors and figures and sounds and observances is it according to no standard that you call these fair in each case?
Thus in the first place, when you say that fair bodies are fair, it must be either in view of their use for some particular purpose that each may serve, or in respect of some pleasure arising when, in the act of beholding them, they cause delight to the beholder.
Have you any description to give beyond this of bodily beauty?
Polus
I have not.
Socrates
And so with all the rest in the same way, whether they be figures or colors, is it for some pleasure or benefit or both that you give them the name of "fair"?
Polus
It is.
Socrates
And sounds also, and the effects of music, are not these all in the same case?
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
And further, in all that belongs to laws and observances, surely the "fairness" of them cannot lie beyond those limits of being either beneficial or pleasant or both.
Polus
I think not.
Socrates
And is it not just the same with the "fairness" of studies also?
Polus
Doubtless; and this time, Socrates, your definition is quite fair, when you define what is fair by pleasure and good.
Socrates
And foul by their opposites, pain and evil?
Polus
That needs must follow.
Socrates
Thus when of two fair things one is fairer, the cause is that it surpasses in either one or both of these effects, either in pleasure, or in benefit, or in both.
Polus
Certainly.
Socrates
And again, when one of two foul things is fouler, this will be due to an excess either of pain or of evil: must not that be so?
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
Come then, what was it we heard just now about doing and suffering wrong?
Were you not saying that suffering wrong is more evil, but doing it fouler?
Polus
I was.
Socrates
Well now, if doing wrong is fouler than suffering it, it is either more painful, and fouler by an excess of pain or evil or both;
must not this also be the case?
Polus
Yes, of course.
Socrates
Then let us first consider if doing wrong exceeds suffering it in point of pain if those who do wrong are more pained than those who suffer it.
Polus
Not so at all, Socrates.
Socrates
Then it does not surpass in pain.
Polus
No, indeed.
Socrates
And so, if not in pain, it can no longer be said to exceed in both.
Polus
Apparently not.
Socrates
It remains, then, that it exceeds in the other.
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
In evil.
Polus
So it seems.
Socrates
Then it is by an excess of evil that doing wrong is fouler than suffering it.
Polus
Yes, obviously.
Socrates
Now it is surely admitted by the mass of mankind, as it was too by you in our talk a while ago, that doing wrong is fouler than suffering it.
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
And now it has been found to be more evil.
Polus
So it seems.
Socrates
Then would you rather have the evil and foul when it is more than when it is less?
Do not shrink from answering, Polus you will get no hurt by it: but submit yourself bravely to the argument, as to a doctor, and reply yes or no to my question.
Polus
Why, I should not so choose, Socrates.
Socrates
And would anybody else in the world?
Polus
I think not, by this argument at least.
Socrates
Then I spoke the truth when I said that neither you nor anyone else in the world would choose to do wrong rather than suffer it, since it really is more evil.
Polus
Apparently.
Socrates
So you see, Polus, that when one proof is contrasted with the other they have no resemblance, but whereas you have the assent of every one else except myself, I am satisfied with your sole and single assent and evidence, and I take but your vote only and disregard the rest.
Now let us leave this matter where it stands, and proceed next to examine the second part on which we found ourselves at issue whether for a wrongdoer to pay the penalty is the greatest of evils, as you supposed, or to escape it is a greater, as I on my side held.
Let us look at it this way: do you call paying the just penalty, and being justly punished, for wrongdoing the same thing?
Polus
I do.
Socrates
And can you maintain that all just things are not fair, in so far as they are just?
Consider well before you speak.
Polus
No, I think they are, Socrates.
Socrates
Then take another point: if a man does anything, must there be something which is also acted upon by this doer of the thing?
Polus
I think so.
Socrates
And does it suffer what the doer does, and is the effect such as the agent's action makes it?
I mean, for example, when one strikes a blow something must needs be struck?
Polus
It must.
Socrates
And if the striker strikes hard or quick, the thing struck is struck in the same way?
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
Hence the effect in the thing struck is such as the striker makes it?
Polus
Certainly.
Socrates
And so again, if one burns, something must be burnt?
Polus
Yes, of course.
Socrates
And if one burns severely or sorely, the thing burnt is burnt according as the burner burns it?
Polus
Certainly.
Socrates
And again, if one cuts, the same may be said?
For something is cut.
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
And if the cut is large or deep or sore, the cut made in the thing cut is such as the cutter cuts it?
Polus
Apparently.
Socrates
Then putting it all in a word, see if you agree that what I was just saying applies to all cases that the patient receives an effect of the same kind as the agent's action.
Polus
I do agree.
Socrates
Then this being admitted, is paying the penalty suffering something, or doing it?
Polus
Suffering it must be, Socrates.
Socrates
And at the hands of an agent?
Polus
Yes, of course;
at the hands of the punisher.
Socrates
And he who punishes aright punishes justly?
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
Doing what is just, or not?
Polus
What is just.
Socrates
And he who pays the penalty by being punished suffers what is just?
Polus
Apparently.
Socrates
And what is just, I think we have agreed, is fair?
Polus
Certainly.
Socrates
Then of these two, the one does what is fair and the other, he who is punished, suffers it.
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
And so, if fair, good?
For that is either pleasant or beneficial.
Polus
It must be so.
Socrates
So he who pays the penalty suffers what is good?
Polus
It seems so.
Socrates
Then he is benefited?
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
Is it the benefit I imagine?
that he becomes better in soul if he is justly punished?
Polus
Quite likely.
Socrates
Then is he who pays the penalty relieved from badness of soul?
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
And so relieved from the greatest evil?
Look at it this way; in a man's pecuniary resources do you perceive any other badness than poverty?
Polus
No, only poverty.
Socrates
And what in his bodily resources?
You would say that badness there is weakness or disease or ugliness or the like?
Polus
I would.
Socrates
And in soul too you believe there is a certain wickedness?
Polus
Of course.
Socrates
And do you not call this injustice, ignorance, cowardice, and so forth?
Polus
Certainly I do.
Socrates
So now in property, body, and soul, these three, you have mentioned three vices poverty, disease, and injustice?
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
Then which of these vices is the foulest?
Is it not injustice in short, the vice of the soul?
Polus
Far the foulest.
Socrates
And if foulest, then also most evil?
Polus
How do you mean, Socrates?
Socrates
Just this: the foulest is foulest in each case because it produces the greatest pain or harm or both; this follows from our previous admissions.
Polus
Quite so.
Socrates
And foulest of all, we have just agreed, is injustice and, in general, vice of soul?
Polus
Yes, we have.
Socrates
So then either it is most painful, that is, foulest of these vices by an excess of painfulness, or else of harmfulness, or in both ways?
Polus
Necessarily.
Socrates
Then do you think that being unjust, licentious, cowardly, and ignorant is more painful than being poor and sick?
Polus
No, I do not, Socrates, from what we have said.
Socrates
Portentous then must be the extent of harm, and astonishing the evil, by which the soul's vice exceeds all the others so as to be foulest of all, since it is not by pain, on your view of the matter.
Polus
Apparently.
Socrates
But further, I suppose, whatever has an excess of harm in the greatest measure, must be the greatest evil in the world.
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
So injustice, licentiousness, and in general, vice of soul, are the greatest evils in the world?
Polus
Apparently.
Socrates
Now what is the art that relieves from poverty?
Is it not money-making?
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
And what from disease?
Is it not medicine?
Polus
It must be.
Socrates
And what from wickedness and injustice?
If you are not ready for that offhand, consider it thus: whither and to whom do we take those who are in bodily sickness?
Polus
To the doctor, Socrates.
Socrates
And whither the wrongdoers and libertines?
Polus
To the law-court, do you mean?
Socrates
Yes, and to pay the penalty?
Polus
I agree.
Socrates
Then is it not by employing a kind of justice that those punish who punish aright?
Polus
Clearly so.
Socrates
Then money-making relieves us from poverty, medicine from disease, and justice from licentiousness and injustice.
Polus
Apparently.
Socrates
Which then is the fairest of these things?
Polus
Of what things, pray?
Socrates
Moneymaking, medicine, justice.
Polus
Justice, Socrates, is far above the others.
Socrates
Now again, if it is fairest, it causes either most pleasure or benefit or both.
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
Well then, is it pleasant to be medically treated, and do those who undergo such treatment enjoy it?
Polus
I do not think so.
Socrates
But it is beneficial, is it not?
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
Because one is relieved of a great evil, and hence it is worth while to endure the pain and be well.
Polus
Of course.
Socrates
Is this then the happiest state of body for a man to be in that of being medically treated or that of never being ill at all?
Polus
Clearly, never being ill.
Socrates
Yes, for what we regarded as happiness, it seems, was not this relief from evil, but its non-acquisition at any time.
Polus
That is so.
Socrates
Well now, which is the more wretched of two persons who have something evil either in body or in soul, he who is medically treated and is relieved of the evil, or he who is not treated and keeps it?
Polus
To my thinking, he who is not treated.
Socrates
And we found that paying the penalty is a relief from the greatest evil, wickedness?
Polus
We did.
Socrates
Because, I suppose, the justice of the court reforms us and makes us juster, and acts as a medicine for wickedness.
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
Happiest therefore is he who has no vice in his soul, since we found this to be the greatest of evils.
Polus
Clearly so.
Socrates
Next after him, I take it, is he who is relieved of it.
Polus
So it seems.
Socrates
And that was the man who is reproved, reprimanded, and made to pay the penalty.
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
Hence the worst life is led by him who has the vice and is not relieved of it.
Polus
Apparently.
Socrates
And this is the man who in committing the greatest wrongs and practicing the greatest injustice has contrived to escape reproof and chastisement and penalty alike, as you say Archelaus has succeeded in doing, and the rest of the despots and orators and overlords?
Polus
So it seems.
Socrates
Because, I conceive, my excellent friend, what these persons have contrived for themselves is very much as though a man who was the victim of the worst diseases should contrive not to submit to the doctor's penalty for his bodily transgressions and take the prescribed treatment, from a childish fear of cautery or incision, as being so painful.
Or do you not agree to this view of it?
Polus
I do.
Socrates
Since he was ignorant, it would seem, of the virtue of bodily health and fitness.
For it is very probable, from what we have just agreed, that something like this is done also by those who evade their due penalty, Polus;
they perceive its painfulness, but are blind to its benefits, and are unaware how much more wretched than lack of health in the body it is to dwell with a soul that is not healthy, but corrupt, unjust, and unholy; and hence it is that they do all they can to avoid paying the penalty and being relieved of the greatest of evils, by providing themselves with money and friends and the ability to excel in persuasive speech.
But if what we have agreed is true, Polus, do you observe the consequences of our argument?
Or, if you like, shall we reckon them up together?
Polus
Yes, if you do not mind.
Socrates
Then does it result that injustice and wrongdoing is the greatest evil?
Polus
Yes, apparently.
Socrates
And further, it appeared that paying the penalty is a relief from this evil?
Polus
It looks like it.
Socrates
Whereas not paying it is a retention of the evil in us?
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
Thus wrongdoing is second of evils in greatness; but to do wrong and not pay the penalty is the greatest and takes the first place among all evils.
Polus
It seems so.
Socrates
Well now, my friend, was this the point at issue between us, that you counted Archelaus, who did the greatest wrong, happy because he paid no penalty, whilst I on the contrary thought that anyone whether Archelaus or any other person you please who pays no penalty for the wrong he has done, is peculiarly and pre-eminently wretched among men, and that it is always the wrongdoer who is more wretched than the wronged, and the unpunished than the punished?
Is not this what I stated?
Polus
Yes.
Socrates
Then has it not been proved that this was a true statement?
Polus
Apparently.
Socrates
Very well: so if this is true, Polus, what is the great use of rhetoric?
For you see by what we have just agreed that a man must keep a close watch over himself so as to avoid wrongdoing, since it would bring a great deal of evil upon him; must he not?
Polus
Certainly.
Socrates
But if he is guilty of wrongdoing, either himself or anyone else he may care for, he must go of his own freewill where he may soonest pay the penalty, to the judge as if to his doctor, with the earnest intent that the disease of his injustice shall not become chronic and cause a deep incurable ulcer in his soul.
Or what are we to say, Polus, if our former conclusions stand?
Must not our later ones accord with them in this way, and in this only?
Polus
Yes, what else, indeed, are we to say, Socrates?
Socrates
Then for pleading in defence of injustice, whether it is oneself or one's parents or friends or children or country that has done the wrong,
rhetoric is of no use to us at all, Polus;
except one were to suppose, perchance, to the contrary, that a man ought to accuse himself first of all, and in the second place his relations or anyone else of his friends who may from time to time be guilty of wrong;
and, instead of concealing the iniquity, to bring it to light in order that he may pay the penalty and be made healthy; and, moreover, to compel both himself and his neighbors not to cower away but to submit with closed eyes and good courage, as it were, to the cutting and burning of the surgeon, in pursuit of what is good and fair, and without reckoning in the smart:
if his crimes have deserved a flogging, he must submit to the rod; if fetters, to their grip; if a fine, to its payment; if banishment, to be banished; or if death, to die; himself to be the first accuser either of himself or of his relations, and to employ his rhetoric for the purpose of so exposing their iniquities that they may be relieved of that greatest evil, injustice.
Shall this be our statement or not, Polus?
Polus
An extraordinary one, Socrates, it seems to me, though perhaps you do find it agrees with what went before.
Socrates
Well, either that must be upset, or this necessarily follows.
Polus
Yes, that certainly is so.
Socrates
And so again conversely, supposing it is our duty to injure somebody, whether an enemy or anyone else provided only that it is not against oneself that wrong has been done by such enemy, for this we must take care to avoid but supposing our enemy has wronged some one else, we must make every exertion of act and word to prevent him from being punished or coming to trial, or if he does, we must contrive that our enemy shall escape and not be punished; nay, if he has carried off a great lot of gold, that he shall not refund it but keep and spend it on himself and his, unjustly and godlessly, or if he has committed crimes that deserve death, that he shall not die; if possible, never die, but be deathless in his villainy, or failing that, live as long a time as may be in that condition.
Such are the purposes, as it seems to me, Polus, for which rhetoric is useful, since to him who has no intention of doing wrong it is, I consider, of no great use, if indeed there is any use in it at all; for in our previous argument it was nowhere to be found.
Callicles
Tell me, Chaerephon, is Socrates in earnest over this, or only joking?
Chaerephon
To my thinking, Callicles, prodigiously in earnest: still, there is nothing like asking him.
Callicles
Upon my word, just what I want to do.
Tell me, Socrates, are we to take you as serious just now, or joking?
For if you are serious and what you say is really true, must not the life of us human beings have been turned upside down, and must we not be doing quite the opposite, it seems, of what we ought to do?
Socrates
Callicles, if men had not certain feelings, each common to one sort of people, but each of us had a feeling peculiar to himself and apart from the rest, it would not be easy for him to indicate his own impression to his neighbor.
I say this because I notice that you and I are at this moment in much the same condition, since the two of us are enamored each of two things I of Alcibiades, son of Cleinias, and philosophy, and you of two, the Athenian Demus, and the son of Pyrilampes.
Now I always observe that, for all your cleverness, you are unable to contradict your favorite, however much he may say or whatever may be his account of anything, but are ever changing over from side to side.
In the Assembly, if the Athenian Demus disagrees with some statement you are making, you change over and say what it desires and just the same thing happens to you in presence of that fair youth, the son of Pyrilampes; you are unable to resist the counsels and statements of your darling, so that if anyone showed surprise at the strangeness of the things you are constantly saying under that influence, you would probably tell him, if you chose to speak the truth,
that unless somebody makes your favorite stop speaking thus, you, will never stop speaking thus either.
Consider yourself therefore obliged to hear the same sort of remark from me now, and do not be surprised at my saying it, but make my darling, philosophy, stop talking thus.
For she, my dear friend, speaks what you hear me saying now, and she is far less fickle to me than any other favorite: that son of Cleinias is ever changing his views, but philosophy always holds the same, and it is her speech that now surprises you, and she spoke it in your own presence.
So you must either refute her, as I said just now, by proving that wrongdoing and impunity for wrong done is not the uttermost evil; or, if you leave that unproved, by the Dog, god of the Egyptians, there will be no agreement between you, Callicles, and Callicles, but you will be in discord with him all your life.
And yet I, my very good sir, should rather choose to have my lyre, or some chorus that I might provide for the public, out of tune and discordant, or to have any number of people disagreeing with me and contradicting me, than that I should have internal discord and contradiction in my own single self.
Callicles
Socrates, you seem to be roistering recklessly in your talk, like the true demagogue that you are; and you are declaiming now in this way because Polus has got into the same plight as he was accusing Gorgias of letting himself be led into by you.
For he said, I think, when you asked Gorgias whether, supposing a man came to him with no knowledge of justice but a desire to learn rhetoric,
he would instruct the man, Gorgias showed some shame and said he would, because of the habit of mind in people which would make them indignant if refused and so, because of this admission, he was forced to contradict himself, and that was just what suited you and Polus was right, to my thinking, in mocking at you as he did then; but this time he has got into the very same plight himself.
For my own part, where I am not satisfied with Polus is just that concession he made to you that doing wrong is fouler than suffering it; for owing to this admission he too in his turn got entangled in your argument and had his mouth stopped, being ashamed to say what he thought.
For you, Socrates, really turn the talk into such low, popular clap-trap, while you give out that you are pursuing the truth into stuff that is "fair," not by nature, but by convention.
Yet for the most part these two nature and convention are opposed to each other, so that if a man is ashamed and dares not say what he thinks, he is forced to contradict himself.
And this, look you, is the clever trick you have devised for our undoing in your discussions: when a man states anything according to convention you slip "according to nature" into your questions; and again, if he means nature, you imply convention.
In the present case, for instance, of doing and suffering wrong, when Polus was speaking of what is conventionally fouler, you followed it up in the sense of what is naturally so.
For by nature everything is fouler that is more evil, such as suffering wrong: doing it is fouler only by convention.
Indeed this endurance of wrong done is not a man's part at all, but a poor slave's, for whom it is better to be dead than alive, as it is for anybody who, when wronged or insulted, is unable to protect himself or anyone else for whom he cares.
But I suppose the makers of the laws are the weaker sort of men, and the more numerous.
So it is with a view to themselves and their own interest that they make their laws and distribute their praises and censures; and to terrorize the stronger sort of folk who are able to get an advantage, and to prevent them from getting one over them, they tell them, that such aggrandizement is foul and unjust, and that wrongdoing is just this endeavor to get the advantage of one's neighbors: for I expect they are well content to see themselves on an equality, when they are so inferior.
So this is why by convention it is termed unjust and foul to aim at an advantage over the majority, and why they call it wrongdoing: but nature, in my opinion, herself proclaims the fact that it is right for the better to have advantage of the worse, and the abler of the feebler.
It is obvious in many cases that this is so, not only in the animal world, but in the states and races, collectively, of men that right has been decided to consist in the sway and advantage of the stronger over the weaker.
For by what manner of right did Xerxes march against Greece, or his father against Scythia?
Or take the countless other cases of the sort that one might mention.
Why, surely these men follow nature the nature of right in acting thus; yes, on my soul, and follow the law of nature though not that, I dare say, which is made by us; we mold the best and strongest amongst us, taking them from their infancy like young lions, and utterly enthral them by our spells and witchcraft, telling them the while that they must have but their equal share, and that this is what is fair and just.
But, I fancy, when some man arises with a nature of sufficient force, he shakes off all that we have taught him, bursts his bonds, and breaks free; he tramples underfoot our codes and juggleries, our charms and "laws," which are all against nature; our slave rises in revolt and shows himself our master, and there dawns the full light of natural justice.
And it seems to me that Pindar adds his evidence to what I say, in the ode where he says
"Law the sovereign of all,
Mortals and immortals,"
which, so he continues,
"Carries all with highest hand, justifying the utmost force:
in proof I take The deeds of Hercules, for unpurchased"
the words are something like that I do not know the poem well but it tells how he drove off the cows as neither a purchase nor a gift from Geryones; taking it as a natural right that cows ar any other possessions of the inferior and weaker should all belong to the superior and stronger.
Well, that is the truth of the matter; and you will grasp it if you will now put philosophy aside and pass to greater things.
For philosophy, you know, Socrates, is a charming thing, if a man has to do with it moderately in his younger days; but if he continues to spend his time on it too long, it is ruin to any man.
However well endowed one may be, if one philosophizes far on into life, one must needs find oneself ignorant of everything that ought to be familiar to the man who would be a thorough gentleman and make a good figure in the world.
For such people are shown to be ignorant of the laws of their city, and of the terms which have to be used in negotiating agreements with their fellows in private or in public affairs, and of human pleasures and desires; and, in short, to be utterly inexperienced in men's characters.
So when they enter upon any private or public business they make themselves ridiculous, just as on the other hand, I suppose, when public men engage in your studies and discussions, they are quite ridiculous.
The fact is, as Euripides has it
whereas that in which he is weak he shuns and vilifies; but the other he praises, in kindness to himself, thinking in this way to praise himself also.
But the most proper course, I consider, is to take a share of both.
It is a fine thing to partake of philosophy just for the sake of education, and it is no disgrace for a lad to follow it: but when a man already advancing in years continues in its pursuit, the affair, Socrates, becomes ridiculous; and for my part I have much the same feeling towards students af philosophy as towards those who lisp or play tricks.
For when I see a little child, to whom it is still natural to talk in that way, lisping or playing some trick, I enjoy it, and it strikes me as pretty and ingenuous and suitable to the infant's age; whereas if I hear a small child talk distinctly, I find it a disagreeable thing, and it offends my ears and seems to me more befitting a slave.
But when one hears a grown man lisp, or sees him play tricks, it strikes one as something ridiculous and unmanly, that deserves a whipping.
Just the same, then, is my feeling towards the followers of philosophy.
For when I see philosophy in a young lad I approve of it; I consider it suitable, and I regard him as a person of liberal mind: whereas one who does not follow it I account illiberal and never likely to expect of himself any fine or generous action.
But when I see an elderly man still going on with philosophy and not getting rid of it, that is the gentleman, Socrates, whom I think in need of a whipping.
For as I said just now, this person, however well endowed he may be, is bound to become unmanly through shunning the centers and marts of the city, in which, as the poet said, "men get them note and glory"; he must cower down and spend the rest of his days whispering in a corner with three or four lads, and never utter anything free or high or spirited.
Now I, Socrates, am quite fairly friendly to you, and so I feel very much at this moment as Zethus did, whom I have mentioned, towards Amphion in Euripides.
Indeed I am prompted to address you in the same sort of words as he did his brother: "You neglect, Socrates, what you ought to mind; you distort with a kind of boyish travesty a soul of such noble nature; and neither will you bring to the counsels of justice any rightly spoken word, nor will you accept any as probable or convincing, nor advise any gallant plan for your fellow."
And yet, my dear Socrates now do not be annoyed with me, for I am going to say this from goodwill to you does it not seem to you disgraceful to be in the state I consider you are in, along with the rest of those who are ever pushing further into philosophy?
For as it is, if somebody should seize hold of you or anyone else at all of your sort, and drag you off to prison, asserting that you were guilty of a wrong you had never done, you know you would be at a loss what to do with yourself, and would be all dizzy and agape without a word to say; and when you came up in court, though your accuser might be ever so paltry a rascal, you would have to die if he chose to claim death as your penalty.
And yet what wisdom is there, Socrates, "in an art that found a man of goodly parts and made him worse," unable either to succor himself, or to deliver himself or anyone else from the greatest dangers, but like to be stripped by his enemies of all his substance, and to live in his city as an absolute outcast?
Such a person, if one may use a rather low expression, can be given a box on the ear with impunity.
No, take my advice, my good sir, "and cease refuting; some practical proficiency induce," something that will give you credit for sense: "to others leave these pretty toys," call them vaporings or fooleries as you will, "which will bring you to inhabit empty halls"; and emulate, not men who probe these trifles, but who have means and repute and other good things in plenty.
Socrates
If my soul had happened to be made of gold, Callicles, do you not think I should have been delighted to find one of those stones with which they test gold, and the best one; which, if I applied it, and it confirmed to me that my soul had been properly tended, would give me full assurance that I am in a satisfactory state and have no need of other testing?
Callicles
What is the point of that question, Socrates?
Socrates
I will tell you.
I am just thinking what a lucky stroke I have had in striking up with you.
Callicles
How so?
Socrates
I am certain that whenever you agree with me in any view that my soul takes, this must be the very truth.
For I conceive that whoever would sufficiently test a soul as to rectitude of life or the reverse should go to work with three things which are all in your possession knowledge, goodwill, and frankness.
I meet with many people who are unable to test me, because they are not wise as you are; while others, though wise, are unwilling to tell me the truth, because they do not care for me as you do;
and our two visitors here, Gorgias and Polus, though wise and friendly to me, are more lacking in frankness and inclined to bashfulness than they should be: nay, it must be so,
when they have carried modesty to such a point that each of them can bring himself, out of sheer modesty, to contradict himself in face of a large company, and that on questions of the greatest importance.
But you have all these qualities which the rest of them lack: you have had a sound education, as many here in Athens will agree; and you are well disposed to me.
You ask what proof I have?
I will tell you.
I know, Callicles, that four of you have formed a partnership in wisdom you, Tisander of Aphidnae, Andron, son of Androtion, and Nausicydes of Cholarges;
and I once overheard you debating how far the cultivation of wisdom should be carried, and I know you were deciding in favor of some such view as this that one should not be carried away into the minuter points of philosophy, but you exhorted one another to beware of making yourselves overwise, lest you should unwittingly work your own ruin.
So when I hear you giving me the same advice as you gave your own most intimate friends, I have proof enough that you really are well disposed to me.
And further, as to your ability to speak out frankly and not be bashful, you not only claim this yourself, but you are borne out too by the speech that you made a short while ago.
Well, this is clearly the position of our question at present:
if you can bear me out in any point arising in our argument, that point can at once be taken as having been amply tested by both you and me,
and there will be no more need of referring it to a further test;
for no defect of wisdom or access of modesty could ever have been your motive in making this concession, nor again could you make it to deceive me: for you are my friend, as you say yourself.
Hence any agreement between you and me must really have attained the perfection of truth.
And on no themes could one make more honorable inquiry, Callicles, than on those which you have reproached me with what character one should have, and what should be one's pursuits and up to what point, in later as in earlier years.
For I assure you that if there is any fault of conduct to be found in my own life it is not an intentional error, but due to my ignorance:
so I ask you not to break off in the middle of your task of admonishing me, but to make fully clear to me what it is that I ought to pursue and by what means I may attain it; and if you find me in agreement with you now, and afterwards failing to do what I agreed to, regard me as a regular dunce and never trouble any more to admonish me again a mere good-for-nothing.
Now, go right back and repeat to me what you and Pindar hold natural justice to consist in:
is it that the superior should forcibly despoil the inferior, the better rule the worse, and the nobler have more than the meaner?
Have you some other account to give of justice, or do I remember aright?
Callicles
Why, that is what I said then, and I say it now also.
Socrates
Is it the same person that you call "better" and "superior"?
For I must say I was no more able then to understand what your meaning might be.
Is it the stronger folk that you call superior, and are the weaker ones bound to hearken to the stronger one as for instance I think you were also pointing out then, that the great states attack the little ones in accordance with natural right, because they are superior and stronger, on the ground that the superior and the stronger and the better are all the same thing; or is it possible to be better and yet inferior and weaker, and to be superior and yet more wicked?
Or is the definition of the better and the superior the same?
This is just what I bid you declare in definite terms whether the superior and the better and the stronger are the same or different.
Callicles
Well, I tell you plainly, they are all the same.
Socrates
Now, are the many superior by nature to the one?
I mean those who make the laws to keep a check on the one, as you were saying yourself just now.
Callicles
Of course.
Socrates
Then the ordinances of the many are those of the superior.
Callicles
Certainly.
Socrates
And so of the better?
For the superior are far better, by your account.
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
And so their ordinances are by nature "fair," since they are superior who made them?
Callicles
I agree.
Socrates
Then is it the opinion of the many that as you also said a moment ago justice means having an equal share, and it is fouler to wrong than be wronged?
Is that so, or not?
And mind you are not caught this time in a bashful fit.
Is it, or is it not, the opinion of the many that to have one's equal share, and not more than others, is just, and that it is fouler to wrong than be wronged?
Do not grudge me an answer to this, Callicles, so that if I find you agree with me I may then have the assurance that comes from the agreement of a man so competent to decide.
Callicles
Well, most people do think so.
Socrates
Then it is not only by convention that doing wrong is fouler than suffering it, and having one's equal share is just, but by nature also: and therefore it looks as though your previous statement was untrue, and your count against me incorrect, when you said that convention and nature are opposites and that I, forsooth, recognizing that, am an unscrupulous debater, turning to convention when the assertion refers to nature, and to nature when it refers to convention.
Callicles
What an inveterate driveller the man is!
Tell me, Socrates, are you not ashamed to be word-catching at your age, and if one makes a verbal slip, to take that as a great stroke of luck?
Do you imagine that, when I said "being superior," I meant anything else than "better"?
Have I not been telling you ever so long that I regard the better and the superior as the same thing?
Or do you suppose I mean that if a pack of slaves and all sorts of fellows who are good for nothing, except perhaps in point of physical strength, gather together and say something, that is a legal ordinance?
Socrates
Very well, most sapient Callicles: you mean that, do you?
Callicles
Certainly I do.
Socrates
Why, my wonderful friend, I have myself been guessing ever so long that you meant something of this sort by "superior," and if I repeat my questions it is because I am so keen to know definitely what your meaning may be.
For I presume you do not consider that two are better than one, or that your slaves are better than yourself, just because they are stronger than you are.
Come now, tell me again from the beginning what it is you mean by the better, since you do not mean the stronger only,
admirable sir, do be more gentle with me over my first lessons, or I shall cease attending your school.
Callicles
You are sarcastic, Socrates.
Socrates
No, by Zethus, Callicles, whom you made use of just now for aiming a good deal of sarcasm at me: but come, tell us whom you mean by the better.
Callicles
I mean the more excellent.
Socrates
So you see, you are uttering mere words yourself, and explaining nothing.
Will you not tell us whether by the better and superior you mean the wiser, or some other sort?
Callicles
Why, to be sure, I mean those, and very much so.
Socrates
Then one wise man is often superior to ten thousand fools, by your account, and he ought to rule and they to be ruled, and the ruler should have more than they whom he rules.
That is what you seem to me to intend by your statement and I am not word-catching here if the one is superior to the ten thousand.
Callicles
Why, that is my meaning.
For this is what I regard as naturally just that being better and wiser he should have both rule and advantage over the baser people.
Socrates
Stop there now.
Once more, what is your meaning this time?
Suppose that a number of us are assembled together, as now, in the same place, and we have in common a good supply of food and drink, and we are of all sorts some strong, some weak; and one of us, a doctor, is wiser than the rest in this matter and, as may well be, is stronger than some and weaker than others; will not he, being wiser than we are, be better and superior in this affair?
Callicles
Certainly.
Socrates
Then is he to have a larger ration than the rest of us because he is better, or ought he as ruler to have the distribution of the whole stock, with no advantage in spending and consuming it upon his own person,
if he is to avoid retribution, but merely having more than some and less than others?
Or if he chance to be the weakest of all, ought he not to get the smallest share of all though he be the best, Callicles?
Is it not so, good sir?
Callicles
You talk of food and drink and doctors and drivel: I refer to something different.
Socrates
Then tell me, do you call the wiser better?
Yes or no?
Callicles
Yes, I do.
Socrates
But do you not think the better should have a larger share?
Callicles
Yes, but not of food and drink.
Socrates
I see; of clothes, perhaps; and the ablest weaver should have the largest coat, and go about arrayed in the greatest variety of the finest clothes?
Callicles
What have clothes to do with it?
Socrates
Well, shoes then; clearly he who is wisest in regard to these, and best, should have some advantage.
Perhaps the shoemaker should walk about in the biggest shoes and wear the largest number.
Callicles
Shoes what have they to do with it?
You keep on drivelling.
Socrates
Well, if you do not mean things of that sort, perhaps you mean something like this: a farmer, for instance, who knows all about the land and is highly accomplished in the matter, should perhaps have an advantage in sharing the seed, and have the largest possible amount of it for use on his own land.
Callicles
How you keep repeating the same thing, Socrates!
Socrates
Yes, and not only that, Callicles, but on the same subjects too.
Callicles
I believe, on my soul, you absolutely cannot ever stop talking of cobblers and fullers, cooks and doctors, as though our discussion had to do with them.
Socrates
Then will you tell me in what things the superior and wiser man has a right to the advantage of a larger share?
Or will you neither put up with a suggestion from me nor make one yourself?
Callicles
Why, I have been making mine for sometime past.
First of all, by "the superior" I mean, not shoemakers or cooks, but those who are wise as regards public affairs and the proper way of conducting them, and not only wise but manly, with ability to carry out their purpose to the full; and who will not falter through softness of soul.
Socrates
Do you perceive, my excellent Callicles, that your count against me is not the same as mine against you?
For you say I am ever repeating the same things, and reproach me with it, whereas I charge you, on the contrary, with never saying the same thing on the same subject; but at one moment you defined the better and superior as the stronger, and at another as the wiser, and now you turn up again with something else: "the manlier" is what you now tell us is meant by the superior and better.
No, my good friend, you had best say, and get it over, whom you do mean by the better and superior, and in what sphere.
Callicles
But I have told you already: men of wisdom and manliness in public affairs.
These are the persons who ought to rule our cities, and justice means this that these should have more than other people, the rulers than the ruled.
Socrates
How so?
Than themselves, my friend?
Callicles
What do you mean?
Socrates
I mean that every man is his own ruler; or is there no need of one's ruling oneself, but only of ruling others?
Callicles
What do you mean by one who rules himself?
Socrates
Nothing recondite; merely what most people mean one who is temperate and self-mastering, ruler of the pleasures and desires that are in himself.
Callicles
You will have your pleasantry!
You mean "the simpletons" by "the temperate."
Socrates
How so?
Nobody can fail to see that I do not mean that.
Callicles
Oh, you most certainly do, Socrates.
For how can a man be happy if he is a slave to anybody at all?
No, natural fairness and justice, I tell you now quite frankly, is this that he who would live rightly should let his desires be as strong as possible and not chasten them, and should be able to minister to them when they are at their height by reason of his manliness and intelligence, and satisfy each appetite in turn with what it desires.
But this, I suppose, is not possible for the many; whence it comes that they decry such persons out of shame, to disguise their own impotence, and are so good as to tell us that licentiousness is disgraceful, thus enslaving as I remarked before the better type of mankind; and being unable themselves to procure achievement of their pleasures they praise temperance and justice by reason of their own unmanliness.
For to those who started with the advantage of being either kings' sons or able by their own parts to procure some authority or monarchy or absolute power, what in truth could be fouler or worse than temperance and justice in such cases?
Finding themselves free to enjoy good things, with no obstacle in the way, they would be merely imposing on themselves a master in the shape of the law, the talk and the rebuke of the multitude.
Or how could they fail to be sunk in wretchedness by that "fairness" of justice and temperance, if they had no larger portion to give to their own friends than to their enemies, that too when they were rulers in their own cities?
No, in good truth, Socrates which you claim to be seeking the fact is this: luxury and licentiousness and liberty, if they have the support of force, are virtue and happiness, and the rest of these embellishments the unnatural covenants of mankind are all mere stuff and nonsense.
Socrates
Far from ignoble, at any rate, Callicles, is the frankness with which you develop your thesis: for you are now stating in clear terms what the rest of the world think indeed, but are loth to say.
So I beg you not to give up on any account, that it may be made really evident how one ought to live.
Now tell me: do you say the desires are not to be chastened if a man would be such as he ought to be, but he should let them be as great as possible and provide them with satisfaction from some source or other, and this is virtue?
Callicles
Yes, I say that.
Socrates
Then it is not correct to say, as people do, that those who want nothing are happy.
Callicles
No, for at that rate stones and corpses would be extremely happy.
Socrates
Well, well, as you say, life is strange.
For I tell you I should not wonder if Euripides' words were true, when he says:"Who knows if to live is to be dead, And to be dead, to live?
and we really, it may be, are dead;
in fact I once heard sages say that we are now dead, and the body is our tomb, and the part of the soul in which we have desires is liable to be over-persuaded and to vacillate to and fro,
and so some smart fellow, a Sicilian, I daresay, or Italian, made a fable in which by a play of words he named this part, as being so impressionable and persuadable, a jar, and the thoughtless he called uninitiate: in these uninitiate that part of the soul where the desires are, the licentious and fissured part, he named a leaky jar in his allegory, because it is so insatiate.
So you see this person, Callicles, takes the opposite view to yours, showing how of all who are in Hades meaning of course the invisible these uninitiate will be most wretched, and will carry water into their leaky jar with a sieve which is no less leaky.
And then by the sieve, as my story-teller said, he means the soul: and the soul of the thoughtless he likened to a sieve, as being perforated, since it is unable to hold anything by reason of its unbelief and forgetfulness.
All this, indeed, is bordering pretty well on the absurd; but still it sets forth what I wish to impress upon you, if I somehow can, in order to induce you to make a change, and instead of a life of insatiate licentiousness to choose an orderly one that is set up and contented with what it happens to have got.
Now, am I at all prevailing upon you to change over to the view that the orderly people are happier than the licentious or will no amount of similar fables that I might tell you have any effect in changing your mind?
Callicles
The latter is more like the truth, Socrates.
Socrates
Come now, let me tell you another parable from the same school as that I have just told.
Consider if each of the two lives, the temperate and the licentious, might be described by imagining that each of two men had a number of jars, and those of one man were sound and full, one of wine, another of honey, a third of milk, and various others of various things,
and that the sources of each of these supplies were scanty and difficult and only available through much hard toil:
well, one man, when he has taken his fill, neither draws off any more nor troubles himself a jot, but remains at ease on that score;
whilst the other finds, like his fellow, that the sources are possible indeed, though difficult, but his vessels are leaky and decayed, and he is compelled to fill them constantly, all night and day, or else suffer extreme distress.
If such is the nature of each of the two lives, do you say that the licentious man has a happier one than the orderly?
Do I, with this story of mine, induce you at all to concede that the orderly life is better than the licentious, or do I fail?
Callicles
You fail, Socrates.
For that man who has taken his fill can have no pleasure any more; in fact it is what I just now called living like a stone, when one has filled up and no longer feels any joy or pain.
But a pleasant life consists rather in the largest possible amount of inflow.
Socrates
Well then, if the inflow be large, must not that which runs away be of large amount also, and must not the holes for such outflow be of great size?
Callicles
Certainly.
Socrates
Then it is a plover's life you are describing this time, not that of a corpse or a stone.
Now tell me, is the life you mean something like feeling hunger and eating when hungry?
Callicles
Yes, it is.
Socrates
And feeling thirst and drinking when thirsty?
Callicles
Yes, and having all the other desires, and being able to satisfy them, and so with these enjoyments leading a happy life.
Socrates
Bravo, my fine fellow!
Do go on as you have begun, and mind you show no bashfulness about it.
I too, it seems, must try not to be too bashful.
First of all, tell me whether a man who has an itch and wants to scratch, and may scratch in all freedom, can pass his life happily in continual scratching.
Callicles
What an odd person you are, Socrates a regular stump-orator!
Socrates
Why, of course, Callicles, that is how I upset Polus and Gorgias, and struck them with bashfulness; but you, I know, will never be upset or abashed; you are such a manly fellow.
Come, just answer that.
Callicles
Then I say that the man also who scratches himself will thus spend a pleasant life.
Socrates
And if a pleasant one, a happy one also?
Callicles
Certainly.
Socrates
Is it so if he only wants to scratch his head?
Or what more am I to ask you?
See, Callicles, what your answer will be, if you are asked everything in succession that links on to that statement;
and the culmination of the case, as stated the life of catamites is not that awful, shameful, and wretched?
Or will you dare to assert that these are happy if they can freely indulge their wants?
Callicles
Are you not ashamed, Socrates, to lead the discussion into such topics?
Socrates
What, is it I who am leading it there, noble sir, or the person who says outright that those who enjoy themselves, with whatever kind of enjoyment, are happy, and draws no distinction between the good and bad sorts of pleasure?
But come, try again now and tell me whether you say that pleasant and good are the same thing, or that there is some pleasure which is not good.
Callicles
Then, so that my statement may not be inconsistent through my saying they are different, I say they are the same.
Socrates
You are spoiling your first statements, Callicles, and you can no longer be a fit partner with me in probing the truth, if you are going to speak against your own convictions.
Callicles
Why, you do the same, Socrates.
Socrates
Then I am just as much in the wrong if I do, as you are.
But look here, my gifted friend, perhaps the good is not mere unconditional enjoyment: for if it is, we have to face not only that string of shameful consequences I have just shadowed forth, but many more besides.
Callicles
In your opinion, that is, Socrates.
Socrates
And do you, Callicles, really maintain that it is?
Callicles
I do.
Socrates
Then are we to set about discussing it as your serious view?
Callicles
Oh yes, to be sure.
Socrates
Come then, since that is your opinion, resolve me this: there is something, I suppose, that you call knowledge?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
And were you not saying just now that knowledge can have a certain courage coupled with it?
Callicles
Yes, I was.
Socrates
And you surely meant that they were two things, courage being distinct from knowledge?
Callicles
Quite so.
Socrates
Well now, are pleasure and knowledge the same thing, or different?
Callicles
Different, I presume, O sage of sages.
Socrates
And courage too, is that different from pleasure?
Callicles
Of course it is.
Socrates
Come now, let us be sure to remember this, that Callicles the Acharnian said pleasant and good were the same, but knowledge and courage were different both from each other and from the good.
Callicles
And Socrates of Alopece refuses to grant us this;
or does he grant it?
Socrates
He does not; nor, I believe, will Callicles either, when he has rightly considered himself.
For tell me, do you not regard people who are well off as being in the opposite condition to those who are badly off?
Callicles
I do.
Socrates
Then if these conditions are opposite to each other, must not the same hold of them as of health and disease?
For, you know, a man is never well and ill at the same time, nor gets rid of health and disease together.
Callicles
How do you mean?
Socrates
Take, for instance, any part of the body you like by itself, and consider it.
A man, I suppose, may have a disease of the eyes, called ophthalmia?
Callicles
Certainly.
Socrates
Then I presume he is not sound also at that time in those same eyes?
Callicles
By no conceivable means.
Socrates
And what say you, when he gets rid of his ophthalmia?
Does he at that time get rid too of the health of his eyes, and so at last is rid of both things together?
Callicles
Far from it.
Socrates
Because, I imagine, this would be an astonishing and irrational result, would it not?
Callicles
Very much so.
Socrates
Whereas, I take it, he gets and loses either turn?
Callicles
I agree.
Socrates
And so with strength and weakness in just the same way?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
And speed and slowness?
Callicles
Certainly.
Socrates
And so too with good things and happiness and their opposites bad things and wretchedness does one take on each of these in turn, and in turn put it off?
Callicles
Absolutely, I presume.
Socrates
Then if we find any things that a man puts off and retains at one and the same moment, clearly these cannot be the good and the bad.
Do we admit this?
Now consider very carefully before you answer.
Callicles
Oh, I admit it down to the ground.
Socrates
So now for our former admissions:
did you say that being hungry was pleasant or painful?
I mean, hunger itself.
Callicles
Painful, I said; though eating when one is hungry I call pleasant.
Socrates
I see: but at all events hunger itself is painful, is it not?
Callicles
I agree.
Socrates
And so too with thirst?
Callicles
Quite so.
Socrates
Then am I to ask you any further questions, or do you admit that all want and desire is painful?
Callicles
I admit it; no, do not question me further.
Socrates
Very good: but drinking when one is thirsty you surely say is pleasant?
Callicles
I do.
Socrates
Now, in this phrase of yours the words "when one is thirsty," I take it, stand for "when one is in pain"?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
But drinking is a satisfaction of the want, and a pleasure?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
So in the act of drinking, you say, one has enjoyment?
Callicles
Quite so.
Socrates
When one is thirsty?
Callicles
I agree.
Socrates
That is, in pain?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
Then do you perceive the conclusion, that you say one enjoys oneself, though in pain at the same moment, when you say one drinks when one is thirsty?
Or does this not occur at once, at the same place and time in either soul or body, as you please?
For I fancy it makes no difference.
Is this so or not?
Callicles
It is.
Socrates
But further, you say it is impossible to be badly off, or to fare ill, at the same time as one is faring well.
Callicles
Yes, I do.
Socrates
But to enjoy oneself when feeling pain you have admitted to be possible.
Callicles
Apparently.
Socrates
Hence enjoyment is not faring well, nor is feeling pain faring ill, so that the pleasant is found to be different from the good.
Callicles
I cannot follow these subtleties of yours, Socrates.
Socrates
You can, but you play the innocent, Callicles.
Just go on a little further, that you may realize how subtle is your way of reproving me.
Does not each of us cease at the same moment from thirst and from the pleasure he gets by drinking?
Callicles
I cannot tell what you mean.
Gorgias
No, no, Callicles, you must answer him, for our sakes also, that the arguments may be brought to a conclusion.
Callicles
But Socrates is always like this, Gorgias he keeps on asking petty, unimportant questions until he refutes one.
Gorgias
Why, what does that matter to you?
In any case it is not your credit that is at stake, Callicles; just permit Socrates to refute you in such manner as he chooses.
Callicles
Well then, proceed with those little cramped questions of yours, since Gorgias is so minded.
Socrates
You are fortunate, Callicles, in having been initiated into the Great Mysteries before the Little: I did not think that was the proper thing.
So go on answering where you left off as to whether each of us does not cease to feel thirst and pleasure at the same time.
Callicles
I grant it.
Socrates
And so, with hunger and the rest, does he cease to feel the desires and pleasures at the same time?
Callicles
That is so.
Socrates
And also ceases to feel the pains and pleasures at the same time?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
But still he does not cease to have the good and bad at the same time, as you agreed; and now, you do not agree?
Callicles
I do; and what then?
Socrates
Only that we get the result, my friend, that the good things are not the same as the pleasant, nor the bad as the painful.
For with the one pair the cessation is of both at once, but with the other two it is not, since they are distinct.
How then can pleasant things be the same as good, or painful things as bad?
Or if you like, consider it another way for I fancy that even after that you do not admit it.
Just observe: do you not call good people good owing to the presence of good things, as you call beautiful those in whom beauty is present?
Callicles
I do.
Socrates
Well now, do you give the name of good men to fools and cowards?
It was not they just now but brave and wise men whom you so described.
Or is it not these that you call good?
Callicles
To be sure it is.
Socrates
And now, have you ever seen a silly child enjoying itself?
Callicles
I have.
Socrates
And have you never seen a silly man enjoying himself?
Callicles
I should think I have; but what has that to do with it?
Socrates
Nothing; only answer.
Callicles
I have seen one.
Socrates
And again, a man of sense in a state of pain or enjoyment?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
And which sort are more apt to feel enjoyment or pain, the wise or the foolish?
Callicles
I should think there is not much difference.
Socrates
Well, that will suffice.
In war have you ever seen a coward?
Callicles
Of course I have.
Socrates
Well now, when the enemy withdrew, which seemed to you to enjoy it more, the cowards or the brave?
Callicles
Both did, I thought; or if not that, about equally.
Socrates
No matter.
Anyhow, the cowards do enjoy it?
Callicles
Very much.
Socrates
And the fools, it would seem.
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
And when the foe advances, do the cowards alone feel pain, or the brave as well?
Callicles
Both.
Socrates
Alike?
Callicles
More, perhaps, the cowards.
Socrates
And when the foe withdraws, do they not enjoy it more?
Callicles
Perhaps.
Socrates
So the foolish and the wise, and the cowardly and the brave, feel pain and enjoyment about equally, according to you, but the cowardly more than the brave?
Callicles
I agree.
Socrates
But further, are the wise and brave good, and the cowards and fools bad?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
Then the good and the bad feel enjoyment and pain about equally?
Callicles
I agree.
Socrates
Then are the good and the bad about equally good and bad?
Or are the bad in some yet greater measure good and bad?
Callicles
Why, upon my word, I cannot tell what you mean.
Socrates
You are aware, are you not, that you hold that the good are good by the presence of good things, and that the bad are so by the presence of bad things?
And that the pleasures are the good things, and the pains bad things?
Callicles
Yes, I am.
Socrates
Hence in those who have enjoyment the good things the pleasures are present, so long as they enjoy?
Callicles
Of course.
Socrates
Then, good things being present, those who enjoy are good?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
Well now, in those who feel pain are not bad things present, namely pains?
Callicles
They are.
Socrates
And it is by the presence of bad things, you say, that the bad are bad?
Or do you no longer say so?
Callicles
I do say so.
Socrates
Then whoever enjoys is good, and whoever is pained, bad?
Callicles
Certainly.
Socrates
You mean, those more so who feel these things more, and those less who feel less, and those about equally who feel about equally?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
Now you say that the wise and the foolish, the cowardly and the brave, feel enjoyment and pain about equally, or the cowards even more?
Callicles
I do.
Socrates
Then just help me to reckon up the results we get from our admissions for you know they say: "That which seemeth well, tis well twice and also thrice to tell," and to examine too.
We say that the wise and brave man is good, do we not?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
And that the foolish and cowardly is bad?
Callicles
Certainly.
Socrates
And again, that he who enjoys is good?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
And that he who feels pain is bad?
Callicles
Necessarily.
Socrates
And that the good and the bad feel enjoyment and pain in a like manner, or perhaps the bad rather more?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
Then is the bad man made bad or good in a like manner to the good man, or even good in a greater measure?
Does not this follow, along with those former statements, from the assumption that pleasant things and good things are the same?
Must not this be so, Callicles?
Callicles
Let me tell you, Socrates, all the time that I have been listening to you and yielding you agreement, I have been remarking the puerile delight with which you cling to any concession one may make to you, even in jest.
So you suppose that I or anybody else in the world does not regard some pleasures as better, and others worse!
Socrates
Oh ho, Callicles, what a rascal you are, treating me thus like a child now asserting that the same things are one way, now another, to deceive me!
And yet I started with the notion that I should not have to fear any intentional deception on your part, you being my friend; but now I find I was mistaken, and it seems I must, as the old saying goes, e'en make the best of what I have got, and accept just anything you offer.
Well then, what you now state, it seems, is that there are certain pleasures, some good, and some bad; is not that so?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
Then are the beneficial ones good, and the harmful ones bad?
Callicles
Certainly.
Socrates
And are those beneficial which do some good, and those evil which do some evil?
Callicles
I agree.
Socrates
Now are these the sort you mean for instance, in the body, the pleasures of eating and drinking that we mentioned a moment ago?
Then the pleasures of this sort which produce health in the body, or strength, or any other bodily excellence, are these good, and those which have the opposite effects, bad?
Callicles
Certainly.
Socrates
And similarly in the case of pains, are some worthy and some base?
Callicles
Of course.
Socrates
So it is the worthy pleasures and pains that we ought to choose in all our doings?
Callicles
Certainly.
Socrates
And the base ones not?
Callicles
Clearly so.
Socrates
Because, you know, Polus and I, if you recollect, decided that everything we do should be for the sake of what is good.
Do you agree with us in this view that the good is the end of all our actions, and it is for its sake that all other things should be done, and not it for theirs?
Do you add your vote to ours, and make a third?
Callicles
I do.
Socrates
Then it is for the sake of what is good that we should do everything, including what is pleasant, not the good for the sake of the pleasant.
Callicles
Certainly.
Socrates
Now is it in every man's power to pick out which sort of pleasant things are good and which bad, or is professional skill required in each case?
Callicles
Professional skill.
Socrates
Then let us recall those former points I was putting to Polus and Gorgias.
I said, if you remember, that there were certain industries, some of which extend only to pleasure, procuring that and no more, and ignorant of better and worse; while others know what is good and what bad.
And I placed among those that are concerned with pleasure the habitude, not art, of cookery, and among those concerned with good the art of medicine.
Now by the sanctity of friendship, Callicles, do not on your part indulge in jesting with me, or give me random answers against your conviction, or again, take what I say as though I were jesting.
For you see that our debate is upon a question which has the highest conceivable claims to the serious interest even of a person who has but little intelligence namely, what course of life is best; whether it should be that to which you invite me, with all those manly pursuits of speaking in Assembly and practicing rhetoric and going in for politics after the fashion of you modern politicians, or this life of philosophy; and what makes the difference between these two.
Well, perhaps it is best to do what I attempted a while ago, and distinguish them; and then, when we have distinguished them and come to an agreement with each other as to these lives being really two, we must consider what is the difference between them and which of them is the one we ought to live.
Now I daresay you do not yet grasp my meaning.
Callicles
No, I do not.
Socrates
Well, I will put it to you more plainly.
Seeing that we have agreed, you and I, that there is such a thing as "good," and such a thing as "pleasant," and that the pleasant is other than the good, and that for the acquisition of either there is a certain practice or preparation the quest of the pleasant in the one case, and that of the good in the other but first you must either assent or object to this statement of mine:
do you assent?
Callicles
I am with you entirely.
Socrates
Then try and come to a definite agreement with me on what I was saying to our friends here, and see if you now find that what I then said was true.
I was saying, I think, that cookery seems to me not an art but a habitude, unlike medicine, which, I argued, has investigated the nature of the person whom she treats and the cause of her proceedings, and has some account to give of each of these things;
so much for medicine: whereas the other, in respect of the pleasure to which her whole ministration is given, goes to work there in an utterly inartistic manner, without having investigated at all either the nature or the cause of pleasure, and altogether irrationally with no thought, one may say, of differentiation, relying on routine and habitude for merely preserving a memory of what is wont to result; and that is how she is enabled to provide her pleasures.
Now consider first whether you think that this account is satisfactory, and that there are certain other such occupations likewise, having to do with the soul; some artistic, with forethought for what is to the soul's best advantage, and others making light of this, but again, as in the former case, considering merely the soul's pleasure and how it may be contrived for her, neither inquiring which of the pleasures is a better or a worse one,
nor caring for aught but mere gratification, whether for better or worse.
For I, Callicles, hold that there are such, and for my part I call this sort of thing flattery, whether in relation to the body or to the soul or to anything else, whenever anyone ministers to its pleasure without regard for the better and the worse; and you now, do you support us with the same opinion on this matter, or do you gainsay us?
Callicles
Not I; I agree with you, in order that your argument may reach a conclusion, and that I may gratify Gorgias here.
Socrates
And is this the case with only one soul, and not with two or many?
Callicles
No, it is also the case with two or many.
Socrates
Then is it possible also to gratify them all at once, collectively, with no consideration of what is best?
Callicles
I should think it is.
Socrates
Then can you say what are the pursuits which effect this?
Or rather, if you like, when I ask you, and one of them seems to you to be of this class, say yes, and when one does not, say no.
And first let us consider flute-playing.
Does it not seem to you one of this sort, Callicles, aiming only at our pleasure, and caring for naught else ?
Callicles
It does seem so to me.
Socrates
And so too with all similar pursuits, such as harp-playing in the contests?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
And what of choral productions and dithyrambic compositions?
Are they not manifestly, in your view, of the same kind?
Or do you suppose Cinesias, son of Meles, cares a jot about trying to say things of a sort that might be improving to his audience, or only what is likely to gratify the crowd of spectators?
Callicles
Clearly the latter is the case, Socrates, with Cinesias.
Socrates
And what of his father Meles?
Did he ever strike you as looking to what was best in his minstrelsy?
Or did he, perhaps, not even make the pleasantest his aim?
For his singing used to be a pain to the audience.
But consider now: do you not think that all minstrelsy and composing of dithyrambs have been invented for the sake of pleasure?
Callicles
I do.
Socrates
Then what of the purpose that has inspired our stately and wonderful tragic poetry?
Are her endeavor and purpose, to your mind, merely for the gratification of the spectators, or does she strive hard, if there be anything pleasant and gratifying, but bad for them, to leave that unsaid, and if there be anything unpleasant, but beneficial, both to speak and sing that, whether they enjoy it or not?
To which of these two aims, think you, is tragic poetry devoted ?
Callicles
It is quite obvious, in her case, Socrates, that she is bent rather upon pleasure and the gratification of the spectators.
Socrates
Well now, that kind of thing, Callicles, did we say just now, is flattery ?
Callicles
Certainly.
Socrates
Pray then, if we strip any kind of poetry of its melody, its rhythm and its meter, we get mere speeches as the residue, do we not?
Callicles
That must be so.
Socrates
And those speeches are spoken to a great crowd of people?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
Hence poetry is a kind of public speaking.
Callicles
Apparently.
Socrates
Then it must be a rhetorical public speaking or do you not think that the poets use rhetoric in the theaters?
Callicles
Yes, I do.
Socrates
So now we have found a kind of rhetoric addressed to such a public as is compounded of children and women and men, and slaves as well as free; an art that we do not quite approve of, since we call it a flattering one.
Callicles
To be sure.
Socrates
Very well; but now, the rhetoric addressed to the Athenian people, or to the other assemblies of freemen in the various cities what can we make of that?
Do the orators strike you as speaking always with a view to what is best, with the single aim of making the citizens as good as possible by their speeches, or are they, like the poets, set on gratifying the citizens, and do they, sacrificing the common weal to their own personal interest, behave to these assemblies as to children, trying merely to gratify them, nor care a jot whether they will be better or worse in consequence?
Callicles
This question of yours is not quite so simple; for there are some who have a regard for the citizens in the words that they utter, while there are also others of the sort that you mention.
Socrates
That is enough for me.
For if this thing also is twofold, one part of it, I presume, will be flattery and a base mob-oratory, while the other is noble the endeavor, that is, to make the citizens' souls as good as possible, and the persistent effort to say what is best, whether it prove more or less pleasant to one's hearers.
But this is a rhetoric you never yet saw; or if you have any orator of this kind that you can mention, without more ado let me know who he is!
Callicles
No, upon my word, I cannot tell you of anyone, at least among the orators of today.
Socrates
Well then, can you mention one among those of older times whom the Athenians have to thank for any betterment that started at the time of his first harangues, as a change from the worse state in which he originally found them?
For my part, I have no idea who the man is.
Callicles
Why, do you hear no mention of Themistocles and what a good man he was, and Cimon and Miltiades and the great Pericles, who has died recently, and whom you have listened to yourself?
Socrates
Yes, Callicles, if that which you spoke of just now is true virtue the satisfaction of one's own and other men's desires; but if that is not so, and the truth is as we were compelled to admit in the subsequent discussion that only those desires which make man better by their satisfaction should be fulfilled, but those which make him worse should not, and that this is a special art, then I for one cannot tell you of any man so skilled having appeared among them.
Callicles
Ah, but if you search properly you will find one.
Socrates
Then let us just consider the matter calmly, and see if any of them has appeared with that skill.
Come now: the good man, who is intent on the best when he speaks, will surely not speak at random in whatever he says, but with a view to some object?
He is just like any other craftsman, who having his own particular work in view selects the things he applies to that work of his, not at random, but with the purpose of giving a certain form to whatever he is working upon.
You have only to look, for example, at the painters, the builders, the shipwrights, or any of the other craftsmen, whichever you like, to see how each of them arranges everything according to a certain order, and forces one part to suit and fit with another, until he has combined the whole into a regular and well-ordered production;
and so of course with all the other craftsmen, and the people we mentioned just now, who have to do with the body trainers and doctors; they too, I suppose, bring order and system into the body.
Do we admit this to be the case, or not?
Callicles
Let it be as you say.
Socrates
Then if regularity and order are found in a house, it will be a good one, and if irregularity, a bad one?
Callicles
I agree.
Socrates
And it will be just the same with a ship?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
And further, with our bodies also, can we say?
Callicles
Certainly.
Socrates
And what of the soul?
If it shows irregularity, will it be good, or if it has a certain regularity and order?
Callicles
Our former statements oblige us to agree to this also.
Socrates
Then what name do we give to the effect of regularity and order in the body?
Callicles
Health and strength, I suppose you mean.
Socrates
I do.
And what, again, to the effect produced in the soul by regularity and order?
Try to find the name here, and tell it me as before.
Callicles
Why not name it yourself, Socrates ?
Socrates
Well, if you prefer it, I will; and do you, if I seem to you to name it rightly, say so; if not, you must refute me and not let me have my way.
For it seems to me that any regularity of the body is called healthiness, and this leads to health being produced in it, and general bodily excellence.
Is that so or not?
Callicles
It is.
Socrates
And the regular and orderly states of the soul are called lawfulness and law, whereby men are similarly made law-abiding and orderly; and these states are justice and temperance.
Do you agree or not?
Callicles
Be it so.
Socrates
Then it is this that our orator, the man of art and virtue, will have in view, when he applies to our souls the words that he speaks, and also in all his actions, and in giving any gift he will give it, and in taking anything away he will take it, with this thought always before his mind
how justice may be engendered in the souls of his fellow-citizens, and how injustice may be removed; how temperance may be bred in them and licentiousness cut off; and how virtue as a whole may be produced and vice expelled.
Do you agree to this or not?
Callicles
I agree.
Socrates
For what advantage is there, Callicles, in giving to a sick and ill-conditioned body a quantity of even the most agreeable things to eat and drink, or anything else whatever, if it is not going to profit thereby any more, let us say, than by the opposite treatment, on any fair reckoning, and may profit less?
Is this so?
Callicles
Be it so.
Socrates
Because, I imagine, it is no gain for a man to live in a depraved state of body, since in this case his life must be a depraved one also.
Or is not that the case?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
And so the satisfaction of one's desires if one is hungry, eating as much as one likes, or if thirsty, drinking is generally allowed by doctors when one is in health; but they practically never allow one in sickness to take one's fill of things that one desires:
do you agree with me in this?
Callicles
I do.
Socrates
And does not the same rule, my excellent friend, apply to the soul?
So long as it is in a bad state thoughtless, licentious, unjust and unholy we must restrain its desires and not permit it to do anything except what will help it to be better: do you grant this, or not?
Callicles
I do.
Socrates
For thus, I take it, the soul itself is better off?
Callicles
To be sure.
Socrates
And is restraining a person from what he desires correcting him?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
Then correction is better for the soul than uncorrected licence, as you were thinking just now.
Callicles
I have no notion what you are referring to, Socrates; do ask some one else.
Socrates
Here is a fellow who cannot endure a kindness done him, or the experience in himself of what our talk is about a correction!
Callicles
Well, and not a jot do I care, either, for anything you say; I only gave you those answers to oblige Gorgias.
Socrates
Very good.
So now, what shall we do?
Break off our argument midway?
Callicles
You must decide that for yourself.
Socrates
Why, they say one does wrong to leave off even stories in the middle; one should set a head on the thing, that it may not go about headless.
So proceed with the rest of your answers, that our argument may pick up a head.
Callicles
How overbearing you are, Socrates!
Take my advice, and let this argument drop, or find some one else to argue with.
Socrates
Then who else is willing?
Surely we must not leave the argument there, unfinished?
Callicles
Could you not get through it yourself, either talking on by yourself or answering your own questions?
Socrates
So that, in Epicharmus's phrase,"what two men spake erewhile" I may prove I can manage single-handed.
And indeed it looks as though it must of sheer necessity be so.
Still, if we are to do this, for my part I think we ought all to vie with each other in attempting a knowledge of what is true and what false in the matter of our argument; for it is a benefit to all alike that it be revealed.
Now I am going to pursue the argument as my view of it may suggest; but if any of you think the admissions I am making to myself are not the truth, you must seize upon them and refute me.
For I assure you I myself do not say what I say as knowing it, but as joining in the search with you; so that if anyone who disputes my statements is found to be on the right track, I shall be the first to agree with him.
This, however, I say on the assumption that you think the argument should be carried through to a conclusion; but if you would rather it were not, let us have done with it now and go our ways.
Gorgias
Well, my opinion is, Socrates, that we ought not to go away yet, but that you should go through with the argument; and I fancy the rest of them think the same.
For I myself, in fact, desire to hear you going through the remainder by yourself.
Socrates
Why, to be sure, Gorgias, I myself should have liked to continue discussing with Callicles here until I had paid him an Amphion's speech in return for his of Zethus.
But since you, Callicles, are unwilling to join me in finishing off the argument, you must at any rate pull me up, as you listen, if it seems to you that my statements are wrong.
And if you refute me, I shall not be vexed with you as you were with me; you will only be recorded in my mind as my greatest benefactor.
Callicles
Proceed, good sir, by yourself, and finish it off.
Socrates
Give ear, then; but first I will resume our argument from the beginning.
Are the pleasant and the good the same thing?
Not the same, as Callicles and I agreed.
Is the pleasant thing to be done for the sake of the good, or the good for the sake of the pleasant?
The pleasant for the sake of the good.
And is that thing pleasant by whose advent we are pleased, and that thing good by whose presence we are good?
Certainly.
But further, both we and everything else that is good, are good by the advent of some virtue?
In my view this must be so, Callicles.
But surely the virtue of each thing, whether of an implement or of a body, or again of a soul or any live creature, does not arrive most properly by accident, but by an order or rightness or art that is apportioned to each.
Is that so?
I certainly agree.
Then the virtue of each thing is a matter of regular and orderly arrangement?
I at least should say so.
Hence it is a certain order proper to each existent thing that by its advent in each makes it good?
That is my view.
So then a soul which has its own proper order is better than one which is unordered?
Necessarily.
But further, one that has order is orderly?
Of course it will be.
And the orderly one is temperate?
Most necessarily.
So the temperate soul is good.
For my part, I can find nothing to say in objection to this, my dear Callicles; but if you can, do instruct me.
Callicles
Proceed, good sir.
Socrates
I say, then, that if the temperate soul is good, one that is in the opposite state to this sensible one is bad; and that was the senseless and dissolute one.
Certainly.
And further, the sensible man will do what is fitting as regards both gods and men; for he could not be sensible if he did what was unfitting.
That must needs be so.
And again, when he does what is fitting as regards men, his actions will be just, and as regards the gods, pious; and he who does what is just and pious must needs be a just and pious man.
That is so.
And surely he must be brave also:
for you know a sound or temperate mind is shown, not by pursuing and shunning what one ought not, but by shunning and pursuing what one ought, whether they be things or people or pleasures or pains, and by steadfastly persevering in one's duty;
so that it follows of strict necessity, Callicles, that the temperate man, as shown in our exposition, being just and brave and pious, is the perfection of a good man; and that the good man does well and fairly whatever he does and that he who does well is blessed and happy, while the wicked man or evil-doer is wretched.
And this must be the man who is in an opposite case to the temperate, the licentious man whom you were commending.
So there is my account of the matter, and I say that this is the truth; and that, if this is true, anyone, as it seems, who desires to be happy must ensue and practice temperance, and flee from licentiousness, each of us as fast as his feet will carry him, and must contrive, if possible, to need no correction; but if he have need of it, either himself or anyone belonging to him, either an individual or a city, then right must be applied and they must be corrected, if they are to be happy.
This, in my opinion, is the mark on which a man should fix his eyes throughout life; he should concentrate all his own and his city's efforts on this one business of providing a man who would be blessed with the needful justice and temperance; not letting one's desires go unrestrained and in one's attempts to satisfy them an interminable trouble leading the life of a robber.
For neither to any of his fellow-men can such a one be dear, nor to God; since he cannot commune with any, and where there is no communion, there can be no friendship.
And wise men tell us, Callicles, that heaven and earth and gods and men are held together by communion and friendship, by orderliness, temperance, and justice; and that is the reason, my friend, why they call the whole of this world by the name of order, not of disorder or dissoluteness.
Now you, as it seems to me, do not give proper attention to this, for all your cleverness, but have failed to observe the great power of geometrical equality amongst both gods and men: you hold that self-advantage is what one ought to practice, because you neglect geometry.
Very well: either we must refute this statement, that it is by the possession of justice and temperance that the happy are happy and by that of vice the wretched are wretched; or if this is true, we must investigate its consequences.
Those former results, Callicles, must all follow, on which you asked me if I was speaking in earnest when I said that a man must accuse himself or his son or his comrade if he do any wrong, and that this is what rhetoric must be used for;
and what you supposed Polus to be conceding from shame is after all true that to do wrong is worse, in the same degree as it is baser, than to suffer it, and that whoever means to be the right sort of rhetorician must really be just and well-informed of the ways of justice, which again Polus said that Gorgias was only shamed into admitting.
This being the case, let us consider what weight, if any, there is in the reproaches you cast upon me: is it fairly alleged or not that I am unable to stand up for myself or any of my friends and relations,
or to deliver them from the sorest perils, but am exposed like an outcast to the whim of anyone who chooses to give me the dashing phrase is yours a box on the ear; or strip me of my substance or expel me from the city; or, worst of all, put me to death; and that to be in such a case is the lowest depth of shame, as your account has it?
But mine though it has been frequently stated already, there can be no objection to my stating it once again is this:
I deny, Callicles, that to be wrongfully boxed on the ear is the deepest disgrace, or to have either my person cut or my purse; I hold that to strike or cut me or mine wrongfully is yet more of a disgrace and an evil, and likewise stealing and kidnapping and housebreaking, and in short any wrong whatsoever done to me or mine, are both worse and more shameful to the wrongdoer than to me the wronged.
All this, which has been made evident in the form I have stated some way back in our foregoing discussion, is held firm and fastened if I may put it rather bluntly with reasons of steel and adamant (so it would seem, at least, on the face of it) which you or somebody more gallant than yourself must undo, or else accept this present statement of mine as the only possible one.
For my story is ever the same, that I cannot tell how the matter stands, and yet of all whom I have encountered, before as now, no one has been able to state it otherwise without making himself ridiculous.
Well now, once more I assume it to be so; but if it is so, and injustice is the greatest of evils to the wrongdoer, and still greater than this greatest, if such can be, when the wrongdoer pays no penalty, what rescue is it that a man must be able to effect for himself if he is not to be ridiculous in very truth?
Is it not one which will avert from us the greatest harm?
Nay, rescue must needs be at its shamefullest, if one is unable to rescue either oneself or one's own friends and relations, and second to it is inability in face of the second sort of evil, and third in face of the third, and so on with the rest; according to the gravity attaching to each evil is either the glory of being able to effect a rescue from each sort, or the shame of being unable.
Is it so or otherwise, Callicles?
Callicles
Not otherwise.
Socrates
Then of these two, doing and suffering wrong, we declare doing wrong to be the greater evil, and suffering it the less.
Now with what should a man provide himself in order to come to his own rescue, and so have both of the benefits that arise from doing no wrong on the one hand, and suffering none on the other?
Is it power or will?
What I mean is, will a man avoid being wronged by merely wishing not to be wronged, or will he avoid it by providing himself with power to avert it?
Callicles
The answer to that is obvious: by means of power.
Socrates
But what about doing wrong?
Will the mere not wishing to do it suffice since, in that case, he will not do it or does it require that he also provide himself with some power or art, since unless he has got such learning or training he will do wrong?
I really must have your answer on this particular point, Callicles whether you think that Polus and I were correct or not in finding ourselves forced to admit, as we did in the preceding argument, that no one does wrong of his own wish, but that all who do wrong do it against their will.
Callicles
Let it be as you would have it, Socrates, in order that you may come to a conclusion of your argument.
Socrates
Then for this purpose also, of not doing wrong, it seems we must provide ourselves with a certain power or art.
Callicles
To be sure.
Socrates
Now what can be the art of providing so that we suffer no wrong, or as little as possible?
Consider if you take the same view of it as I do.
For in my view it is this: one must either be a ruler, or even a despot, in one's city, or else an associate of the existing government.
Callicles
Do you note, Socrates, how ready I am to praise, when you say a good thing?
This seems to me excellently spoken.
Socrates
Then see if this next statement of mine strikes you as a good one too.
It seems to me that the closest possible friendship between man and man is that mentioned by the sages of old time as "like to like."
Do you not agree?
Callicles
I do.
Socrates
So where you have a savage, uneducated ruler as despot, if there were some one in the city far better than he, I suppose the despot would be afraid of him and could never become a friend to him with all his heart?
Callicles
That is so.
Socrates
Nor a friend to anyone who was much inferior to him either; for the despot would despise him and never show him the attention due to a friend.
Callicles
That is true also.
Socrates
Then the only friend of any account that remains for such a person is a man of his own temper, who blames and praises the same things, and is thus willing to be governed by him and to be subject to his rule.
He is a man who will have great power in that state; him none will wrong with impunity.
Is it not so?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
Hence if one of the young men in that city should reflect: In what way can I have great power, and no one may do me wrong? this, it would seem, is the path he must take, to accustom himself from his earliest youth to be delighted and annoyed by the same things as his master, and contrive to be as like the other as possible.
Is it not so?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
And so this man will have attained to a condition of suffering no wrong and having great power as your party maintain in the city.
Callicles
Certainly.
Socrates
And of doing no wrong likewise?
Or is it quite the contrary, if he is to be like his unjust ruler, and have great influence with him?
Well, for my part, I think his efforts will be all the opposite way, that is, towards enabling himself to do as much wrong as possible and to pay no penalty for the wrong he does; will they not?
Callicles
Apparently.
Socrates
And thus he will find himself possessed of the greatest evil, that of having his soul depraved and maimed as a result of his imitation of his master and the power he has got.
Callicles
You have a strange way of twisting your arguments, at each point, this way or that, Socrates!
Surely you know that this imitator will put to death anyone who does not imitate his master, if he pleases, and will strip him of his property.
Socrates
I know that, my good Callicles, if I am not deaf, as I have heard it so often of late from you and Polus, and from almost every one else in the town; but you in return must hear what I say that he will put a man to death if he pleases, but it will be a villain slaying a good man and true.
Callicles
And is not this the very thing that makes one indignant?
Socrates
Not if one is a man of sense, as our argument indicates.
Or do you suppose that the object of a man's efforts should be to live as long a time as possible, and to cultivate those arts which preserve us from every danger; such as that which you bid me cultivate rhetoric, the art that preserves us in the law courts?
Callicles
Yes, on my word I do, and sound advice it is that I give you.
Socrates
But now, my excellent friend,
do you think there is anything grand in the accomplishment of swimming?
Callicles
No, in truth, not I.
Socrates
Yet, you know, that too saves men from death, when they have got into a plight of the kind in which that accomplishment is needed.
But if this seems to you too small a thing, I will tell you of a more important one, the art of piloting, which saves not only our lives but also our bodies and our goods from extreme perils, as rhetoric does.
And at the same time it is plain-fashioned and orderly, not giving itself grand airs in a pretence of performing some transcendent feat; but in return for performing the same as the forensic art bringing one safely over, it may be, from Aegina it charges a fee, I believe, of two obols;
or if it be from Egypt or the Pontus, at the very most for this great service of bringing safe home, as I said just now, oneself and children and goods and womenfolk on landing charges a couple of drachmae; the actual possessor of the art, after performing all this, goes ashore and strolls on the quay by his vessel's side, with an unobtrusive demeanor.
For he knows, I expect, how to estimate the uncertainty as to which of his passengers he has benefited by not letting them be lost at sea, and which he has injured, being aware that he has put them ashore not a whit better than when they came aboard, either in body or in soul.
And so he reckons out how wrong it is that, whereas a victim of severe and incurable diseases of the body who has escaped drowning is miserable in not having died, and has got no benefit at his hands,
yet, if a man has many incurable diseases in that part of him so much more precious than the body, his soul, that such a person is to live, and that he will be doing him the service of saving him either from the sea or from a law court or from any other peril whatsoever: no, he knows it cannot be better for a man who is vicious to live, since he must needs live ill.
This is why it is not the custom for the pilot to give himself grand airs, though he does save our lives; nor for the engineer either, my admirable friend, who sometimes has the power of saving lives in no less degree than a general to say nothing of a pilot or anyone else: for at times he saves whole cities.
Can you regard him as comparable with the lawyer?
And yet, if he chose to speak as you people do, Callicles, magnifying his business, he would bury you in a heap of words, pleading and urging the duty of becoming engineers, as the only thing; for he would find reasons in plenty.
But you none the less despise him and his special art, and you would call him "engineer" in a taunting sense, and would refuse either to bestow your daughter on his son or let your own son marry his daughter.
And yet after the praises you sing of your own pursuits what fair ground have you for despising the engineer and the others whom I was mentioning just now?
I know you would claim to be a better man and of better birth.
But if "better" has not the meaning I give it, but virtue means just saving oneself and one's belongings, whatever one's character may be, you are merely ridiculous in cavilling at the engineer and the doctor and every other art that has been produced for our safety.
No, my gifted friend, just see if the noble and the good are not something different from saving and being saved.
For as to living any particular length of time, this is surely a thing that any true man should ignore, and not set his heart on mere life; but having resigned all this to Heaven and believing what the women say that not one of us can escape his destiny he should then proceed to consider in what way he will best live out his allotted span of life;
whether in assimilating himself to the constitution of the state in which he may be dwelling and so therefore now, whether it is your duty to make yourself as like as possible to the Athenian people, if you intend to win its affection and have great influence in the city:
see if this is to your advantage and mine, so that we may not suffer, my distinguished friend, the fate that they say befalls the creatures who would draw down the moon the hags of Thessaly;
that our choice of this power in the city may not cost us all that we hold most dear.
But if you suppose that anyone in the world can transmit to you such an art as will cause you to have great power in this state without conforming to its government either for better or for worse, in my opinion you are ill-advised, Callicles; for you must be no mere imitator, but essentially like them, if you mean to achieve any genuine sort of friendship with Demus the Athenian people, ay, and I dare swear, with Demus son of Pyrilampes as well.
So whoever can render you most like them is the person to make you a statesman in the way that you desire to be a statesman, and a rhetorician; for everybody is delighted with words that are designed for his special temper, but is annoyed by what is spoken to suit aliens unless you have some other view, dear creature.
Have we any objection to this, Callicles?
Callicles
It seems to me, I cannot tell how, that your statement is right, Socrates, but I share the common feeling; I do not quite believe you.
Socrates
Because the love of Demus, Callicles, is there in your soul to resist me: but if haply we come to examine these same questions more than once, and better, you will believe.
Remember, however, that we said there were two treatments that might be used in the tendance of any particular thing, whether body or soul: one, making pleasure the aim in our dealings with it; the other, working for what is best, not indulging it but striving with it as hard as we can.
Was not this the distinction we were making at that point?
Callicles
Certainly.
Socrates
Then the one, aiming at pleasure, is ignoble and really nothing but flattery, is it not?
Callicles
Be it so, if you like.
Socrates
And the aim of the other is to make that which we are tending, whether it be body or soul, as good as may be.
Callicles
To be sure.
Socrates
Then ought we not to make it our endeavor, in tending our city and its citizens, to make those citizens as good as possible?
For without this, you see, as we found in our former argument, there is no use in offering any other service, unless the intentions of those who are going to acquire either great wealth or special authority or any other sort of power be fair and honorable.
Are we to grant that?
Callicles
Certainly, if you so prefer.
Socrates
Then if you and I, Callicles, in setting about some piece of public business for the state, were to invite one another to see to the building part of it, say the most important erections either of walls or arsenals or temples, would it be our duty to consider and examine ourselves, first as to whether we understood the art of building or not, and from whom we had learnt it?
Would we have to do this, or not?
Callicles
Certainly.
Socrates
And so again, in the second place, whether we had ever erected any building privately for one of our friends or for ourselves, and whether such building was handsome or ugly?
And if we found on consideration that we had been under good and reputable masters, and that there were many handsome buildings that had been erected by us with our masters' guidance, and many also by ourselves alone, after we had dispensed with our masters, it might, in those circumstances, be open to men of sense to enter upon public works:
but if we had neither a master of ourselves to point to, nor any buildings at all, or only a number of worthless ones, in that case surely it would be senseless to attempt public works or invite one another to take them in hand.
Shall we agree to the correctness of this statement or not?
Callicles
Yes, to be sure.
Socrates
And so too with all the rest: suppose, for instance, we had undertaken the duties of state-physicians, and were to invite one another to the work as qualified doctors, we should, I presume, have first inquired of each other, I of you and you of me: Let us see now, in Heaven's name; how does Socrates himself stand as regards his body's health?
Or has anyone else, slave or free, ever had Socrates to thank for ridding him of a disease?
And I also, I fancy, should make the same sort of inquiry about you;
and then, if we found we had never been the cause of an improvement in the bodily condition of anyone, stranger or citizen, man or woman,
by Heaven, Callicles, would it not in truth be ridiculous that men should descend to such folly that, before having plenty of private practice, sometimes with indifferent results, sometimes with success, and so getting adequate training in the art, they should, as the saying is, try to learn pottery by starting on a wine-jar, and start public practice themselves and invite others of their like to do so?
Do you not think it would be mere folly to act thus?
Callicles
I do.
Socrates
And now, most excellent sir, since you are yourself just entering upon a public career, and are inviting me to do the same, and reproaching me for not doing it, shall we not inquire of one another: Let us see, has Callicles ever made any of the citizens better?
Is there one who was previously wicked, unjust, licentious, and senseless, and has to thank Callicles for making him an upright, honorable man, whether stranger or citizen, bond or free?
Tell me, if anyone examines you in these terms, Callicles, what will you say?
What human being will you claim to have made better by your intercourse?
Do you shrink from answering, if there really is some work of yours in private life that can serve as a step to your public practice?
Callicles
You are contentious, Socrates!
Socrates
No, it is not from contentiousness that I ask you this, but from a real wish to know in what manner you can imagine you ought to conduct yourself as one of our public men.
Or can it be, then, that you will let us see you concerning yourself with anything else in your management of the city's affairs than making us, the citizens, as good as possible?
Have we not more than once already admitted that this is what the statesman ought to do?
Have we admitted it or not?
Answer.
We have: I will answer for you.
Then if this is what the good man ought to accomplish for his country, recall now those men whom you mentioned a little while ago, and tell me if you still consider that they showed themselves good citizens Pericles and Cimon and Miltiades and Themistocles.
Callicles
Yes, I do.
Socrates
Then if they were good, clearly each of them was changing the citizens from worse to better.
Was this so, or not?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
So when Pericles began to speak before the people, the Athenians were worse than when he made his last speeches?
Callicles
Perhaps.
Socrates
Not "perhaps," as you say, excellent sir; it follows of necessity from what we have admitted, on the assumption that he was a good citizen.
Callicles
Well, what then?
Socrates
Nothing: but tell me one thing in addition, whether the Athenians are said to have become better because of Pericles, or quite the contrary, to have been corrupted by him.
What I, for my part, hear is that Pericles has made the Athenians idle, cowardly, talkative, and avaricious, by starting the system of public fees.
Callicles
You hear that from the folk with battered ears, Socrates.
Socrates
Ah, but what is no longer a matter of hearsay, but rather of certain knowledge, for you as well as for me, is that Pericles was popular at first, and the Athenians passed no degrading sentence upon him so long as they were "worse"; but as soon as they had been made upright and honorable by him, at the end of our Pericles' life they convicted him of embezzlement, and all but condemned him to death, clearly because they thought him a rogue.
Callicles
What then, was Pericles a bad man on that account?
Socrates
Well, at any rate a herdsman in charge of asses or horses or oxen would be considered a bad one for being like that if he took over animals that did not kick him or butt or bite, and in the result they were found to be doing all these things out of sheer wildness.
Or do you not consider any keeper of any animal whatever a bad one, if he turns out the creature he received tame so much wilder than he found it?
Do you, or do you not?
Callicles
Certainly I do, to oblige you.
Socrates
Then oblige me still further by answering this: is man also one of the animals, or not?
Callicles
Of course he is.
Socrates
And Pericles had charge of men?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
Well now, ought they not, as we admitted this moment, to have been made by him more just instead of more unjust, if he was a good statesman while he had charge of them?
Callicles
Certainly.
Socrates
And the just are gentle, as Homer said.
But what say you?
Is it not so?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
But, however, he turned them out wilder than when he took them in hand, and that against himself, the last person he would have wished them to attack.
Callicles
You wish me to agree with you?
Socrates
Yes, if you consider I am speaking the truth.
Callicles
Then be it so.
Socrates
And if wilder, more unjust and worse?
Callicles
Be it so.
Socrates
Then Pericles was not a good statesman, by this argument.
Callicles
You at least say not.
Socrates
And you too, I declare, by what you admitted.
And now about Cimon once more, tell me, did not the people whom he tended ostracize him in order that they might not hear his voice for ten years?
And Themistocles, did they not treat him in just the same way, and add the punishment of exile?
And Miltiades, the hero of Marathon, they sentenced to be flung into the pit, and had it not been for the president, in he would have gone.
And yet these men, had they been good in the way that you describe them, would never have met with such a fate.
Good drivers, at any rate, do not keep their seat in the chariot at their first race to be thrown out later on, when they have trained their teams and acquired more skill in driving!
This never occurs either in charioteering or in any other business; or do you think it does?
Callicles
No, I do not.
Socrates
So what we said before, it seems, was true, that we know of nobody who has shown himself a good statesman in this city of ours.
You admitted there was nobody among those of the present day, but thought there were some amongst those of former times, and you gave these men the preference.
But these we have found to be on a par with ours of the present day and so, if they were orators, they employed neither the genuine art of rhetoric else they would not have been thrown out nor the flattering form of it.
Callicles
But still there can be no suggestion, Socrates, that any of the present-day men has ever achieved anything like the deeds of anyone you may choose amongst those others.
Socrates
My admirable friend, neither do I blame the latter, at least as servants of the state; indeed, I consider they have shown themselves more serviceable than those of our time, and more able to procure for the city the things she desired.
But in diverting her desires another way instead of complying with them in persuading or compelling her people to what would help them to be better they were scarcely, if at all, superior to their successors; and that is the only business of a good citizen.
But in providing ships and walls and arsenals, and various other things of the sort, I do grant you that they were cleverer than our leaders.
Thus you and I are doing an absurd thing in this discussion:
for during all the time that we have been debating we have never ceased circling round to the same point and misunderstanding each other.
I at all events believe you have more than once admitted and decided that this management of either body or soul is a twofold affair, and that on one side it is a menial service, whereby it is possible to provide meat for our bodies when they are hungry, drink when thirsty, and when they are cold, clothing, bedding, shoes, or anything else that bodies are apt to desire: I purposely give you the same illustrations, in order that you may the more easily comprehend.
For as to being able to supply these things, either as a tradesman or a merchant or a manufacturer of any such actual things baker or cook or weaver or shoemaker or tanner it is no wonder that a man in such capacity should appear to himself and his neighbors to be a minister of the body; to every one, in fact,
who is not aware that there is besides all these an art of gymnastics and medicine which really is, of course, ministration to the body, and which actually has a proper claim to rule over all those arts and to make use of their works, because it knows what is wholesome or harmful in meat and drink to bodily excellence,
whereas all those others know it not; and hence it is that, while those other arts are slavish and menial and illiberal in dealing with the body, gymnastics and medicine can fairly claim to be their mistresses.
Now, that the very same is the case as regards the soul you appear to me at one time to understand to be my meaning, and you admit it as though you knew what I meant;
but a little later you come and tell me that men have shown themselves upright and honorable citizens in our city, and when I ask you who, you seem to me to be putting forward men of exactly the same sort in public affairs;
as if, on my asking you who in gymnastics have ever been or now are good trainers of the body, you were to tell me, in all seriousness, Thearion, the baker, Mithaecus, the author of the book on Sicilian cookery, Sarambus, the vintner these have shown themselves wonderful ministers of the body; the first providing admirable loaves, the second tasty dishes, and the third wine."
Now perhaps you would be indignant should I then say to you: "Sir, you know nothing about gymnastics; servants you tell me of, and caterers to appetites, fellows who have no proper and respectable knowledge of them, and who peradventure will first stuff and fatten men's bodies to the tune of their praises, and then cause them to lose even the flesh they had to start with;
and these in their turn will be too ignorant to cast the blame of their maladies and of their loss of original weight upon their regalers,
but any people who chance to be by at the time and offer them some advice just when the previous stuffing has brought, after the lapse of some time, its train of disease, since it was done without regard to what is wholesome these are the people they will accuse and chide and harm as far as they can, while they will sing the praises of that former crew who caused the mischief.
And you now, Callicles, are doing something very similar to this: you belaud men who have regaled the citizens with all the good cheer they desired.
People do say they have made the city great; but that it is with the swelling of an imposthume, due to those men of the former time, this they do not perceive.
For with no regard for temperance and justice they have stuffed the city with harbors and arsenals and walls and tribute and suchlike trash;
and so whenever that access of debility comes they will lay the blame on the advisers who are with them at the time, and belaud Themistocles and Cimon and Pericles, who caused all the trouble; and belike they will lay hold of you, if you are not on your guard, and my good friend Alcibiades, when they are losing what they had originally as well as what they have acquired, though you are not the authors, except perhaps part-authors, of the mischief.
And yet there is a senseless thing which I see happening now, and hear of, in connection with the men of former times.
For I observe that whenever the state proceeds against one of her statesmen as a wrongdoer, they are indignant and protest loudly against such monstrous treatment: after all their long and valuable services to the state they are unjustly ruined at her hands, so they protest.
But the whole thing is a lie;
since there is not a single case in which a ruler of a city could ever be unjustly ruined by the very city that he rules.
For it is very much the same with pretenders to statesmanship as with professors of sophistry.
The sophists, in fact, with all their other accomplishments, act absurdly in one point:
claiming to be teachers of virtue, they often accuse their pupils of doing them an injury by cheating them of their fees and otherwise showing no recognition of the good they have done them.
Now what can be more unreasonable than this plea?
That men, after they have been made good and just, after all their injustice has been rooted out by their teacher and replaced by justice, should be unjust through something that they have not!
Does not this seem to you absurd, my dear friend?
In truth you have forced me to make quite a harangue, Callicles, by refusing to answer.
Callicles
And you are the man who could not speak unless somebody answered you?
Socrates
Apparently I can.
Just now, at any rate, I am rather extending my speeches, since you will not answer me.
But in the name of friendship, my good fellow, tell me if you do not think it unreasonable for a man, while professing to have made another good, to blame him for being wicked in spite of having been made good by him and still being so?
Callicles
Yes, I do.
Socrates
Well, and you hear such things said by those who profess to give men education in virtue?
Callicles
I do; but what is one to say of such worthless people?
Socrates
And what is one to say of those who, professing to govern the state and take every care that she be as good as possible, turn upon her and accuse her, any time it suits them, of being utterly wicked?
Do you see any difference between these men and the others?
Sophist and orator, my estimable friend, are the same thing, or very much of a piece, as I was telling Polus; but you in your ignorance think the one thing, rhetoric, a very fine affair, and despise the other.
Yet in reality sophistic is a finer thing than rhetoric by so much as legislation is finer than judicature, and gymnastic than medicine: in fact, for my own part, I always regarded public speakers and sophists as the only people who have no call to complain of the thing that they themselves educate, for its wickedness towards them; as otherwise they must in the same words be also charging themselves with having been of no use to those whom they say they benefit.
Is it not so?
Callicles
Certainly.
Socrates
And they alone, I presume, could most likely afford to give away their services without fee, if their words were true.
For when a man has received any other service, for example, if he has acquired a fast pace from a trainer's lessons, he might possibly cheat him of his due if the trainer freely offered himself and did not stipulate for a fee to be paid down by the other as nearly as possible at the moment when he imparted to him the fast pace he required; for it is not through a slow pace, I conceive, that men act unjustly, but through injustice; is it not?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
And so whoever removes this particular thing, injustice, need never have a fear of being unjustly treated; this benefit alone may be freely bestowed without risk, granted that one really had the power of making people good.
Is it not so?
Callicles
I agree.
Socrates
Then this, it seems, is the reason why there is no disgrace in taking money for giving every other kind of advice, as about building or the rest of the arts.
Callicles
It does seem so.
Socrates
But about this business of finding the way to be as good as possible, and of managing one's own household or city for the best, it is recognized to be a disgrace for one to decline to give advice except for a payment in cash, is it not?
Callicles
Yes.
Socrates
The reason evidently being that this is the only sort of service that makes the person so served desire to do one in return and hence it is felt to be a good sign when this service that one has done is repaid to one in kind; but when this is not so, the contrary is felt.
Is the case as I say?
Callicles
It is.
Socrates
Then please specify to which of these two ministrations to the state you are inviting me that of struggling hard, like a doctor, with the Athenians to make them as good as possible, or that of seeking to serve their wants and humor them at every turn?
Tell me the truth, Callicles; for it is only right that, as you began by speaking to me frankly, you should continue to tell me what you think.
So now speak out like a good, generous man.
Callicles
I say then, the way of seeking to serve them.
Socrates
So it is to a flatterer's work, most noble sir, that you invite me?
Callicles
Work for a mean Mysian, if you prefer the name, Socrates; for unless you do as I say
Socrates
Do not tell me, what you have so often repeated, that anyone who pleases will put me to death, lest I on my side should have to tell you that it will be a villain killing a good man; nor that anyone may strip me of whatever I have, lest I should have to say in my turn: Well, but when he has stripped me, he will not know what use to make of his spoil, but as he stripped me unjustly so will he use his spoil unjustly, and if unjustly, foully, and if foully, ill.
Callicles
It quite strikes me, Socrates, that you believe not one of these troubles could befall you, as though you dwelt out of the way, and could never be dragged into a law court by some perhaps utterly paltry rascal.
Socrates
Then I am a fool, Callicles, in truth, if I do not suppose that in this city anyone, whoever he was, might find himself, as luck should have it, in any sort of plight.
Of one thing, however, I am sure that if ever I am brought before the court and stand in any such danger as you mention, it will be some villain who brings me there, for no honest man would prosecute a person who had done no wrong; and it would be no marvel if I were put to death.
Would you like me to tell you my reason for expecting this?
Callicles
Do, by all means.
Socrates
I think I am one of few, not to say the only one, in Athens who attempts the true art of statesmanship, and the only man of the present time who manages affairs of state: hence, as the speeches that I make from time to time are not aimed at gratification, but at what is best instead of what is most pleasant, and as I do not care to deal in "these pretty toys" that you recommend, I shall have not a word to say at the bar.
The same case that I made out to Polus will apply to me; for I shall be like a doctor tried by a bench of children on a charge brought by a cook.
Just consider what defence a person like that would make at such a pass, if the prosecutor should speak against him thus: "Children, this fellow has done you all a great deal of personal mischief, and he destroys even the youngest of you by cutting and burning, and starves and chokes you to distraction, giving you nasty bitter draughts and forcing you to fast and thirst; not like me, who used to gorge you with abundance of nice things of every sort."
What do you suppose a doctor brought to this sad pass could say for himself?
Or if he spoke the truth "All this I did, my boys, for your health" how great, think you, would be the outcry from such a bench as that?
A loud one, would it not?
Callicles
I daresay: one must suppose so.
Socrates
Then you suppose he would be utterly at a loss what to say?
Callicles
Quite so.
Socrates
Such, however, I am sure would be my own fate if I were brought before the court.
For not only shall I have no pleasures to plead as having been provided by me which they regard as services and benefits, whereas I envy neither those who provide them nor those for whom they are provided
but if anyone alleges that I either corrupt the younger men by reducing them to perplexity, or revile the older with bitter expressions whether in private or in public, I shall be unable either to tell the truth and say "It is on just ground that I say all this, and it is your interest that I serve thereby, gentlemen of the jury" or to say anything else; and so I daresay any sort of thing, as luck may have it, will befall me.
Callicles
Then do you think, Socrates, that a man in such a case and with no power of standing up for himself makes a fine figure in a city?
Socrates
Yes, if he had that one resource, Callicles, which you have repeatedly admitted; if he had stood up for himself by avoiding any unjust word or deed in regard either to men or to gods.
For this has been repeatedly admitted by us to be the most valuable kind of self-protection.
Now if I were convicted of inability to extend this sort of protection to either myself or another, I should be ashamed, whether my conviction took place before many or few, or as between man and man; and if that inability should bring about my death, I should be sorely vexed: but if I came to my end through a lack of flattering rhetoric, I am quite sure you would see me take my death easily.
For no man fears the mere act of dying, except he be utterly irrational and unmanly; doing wrong is what one fears: for to arrive in the nether world having one's soul full fraught with a heap of misdeeds is the uttermost of all evils.
And now, if you do not mind, I would like to tell you a tale to show you that the case is so.
Callicles
Well, as you have completed the rest of the business, go on and complete this also.
Socrates
Give ear then, as they say, to a right fine story, which you will regard as a fable, I fancy, but I as an actual account; for what I am about to tell you I mean to offer as the truth.
By Homer's account, Zeus, Poseidon, and Pluto divided the sovereignty amongst them when they took it over from their father.
Now in the time of Cronos there was a law concerning mankind, and it holds to this very day amongst the gods, that every man who has passed a just and holy life departs after his decease to the Isles of the Blest, and dwells in all happiness apart from ill; but whoever has lived unjustly and impiously goes to the dungeon of requital and penance which, you know, they call Tartarus.
Of these men there were judges in Cronos' time, and still of late in the reign of Zeus living men to judge the living upon the day when each was to breathe his last; and thus the cases were being decided amiss.
So Pluto and the overseers from the Isles of the Blest came before Zeus with the report that they found men passing over to either abode undeserving.
Then spake Zeus: "Nay," said he, "I will put a stop to these proceedings.
The cases are now indeed judged ill
and it is because they who are on trial are tried in their clothing,
for they are tried alive.
Now many," said he, "who have wicked souls are clad in fair bodies and ancestry and wealth, and at their judgement appear many witnesses to testify that their lives have been just.
Now, the judges are confounded not only by their evidence but at the same time by being clothed themselves while they sit in judgement, having their own soul muffled in the veil of eyes and ears and the whole body.
Thus all these are a hindrance to them, their own habiliments no less than those of the judged.
Well, first of all," he said, "we must put a stop to their foreknowledge of their death; for this they at present foreknow.
However, Prometheus has already been given the word to stop this in them.
Next they must be stripped bare of all those things before they are tried; for they must stand their trial dead.
Their judge also must be naked, dead, beholding with very soul the very soul of each immediately upon his death, bereft of all his kin and having left behind on earth all that fine array, to the end that the judgement may be just.
Now I, knowing all this before you, have appointed sons of my own to be judges; two from Asia, Minos and Rhadamanthus, and one from Europe, Aeacus.
These, when their life is ended, shall give judgement in the meadow at the dividing of the road, whence are the two ways leading, one to the Isles of the Blest, and the other to Tartarus.
And those who come from Asia shall Rhadamanthus try, and those from Europe, Aeacus; and to Minos I will give the privilege of the final decision, if the other two be in any doubt; that the judgement upon this journey of mankind may be supremely just.
"This, Callicles, is what I have heard and believe to be true; and from these stories, on my reckoning, we must draw some such moral as this: death, as it seems to me, is actually nothing but the disconnection of two things, the soul and the body, from each other.
And so when they are disconnected from one another, each of them keeps its own condition very much as it was when the man was alive, the body having its own nature, with its treatments and experiences all manifest upon it.
For instance, if anyone's body was large by nature or by feeding or by both when he was alive, his corpse will be large also when he is dead; and if he was fat, it will be fat too after his death, and so on for the rest; or again, if he used to follow the fashion of long hair, long-haired also will be his corpse.
Again, if anyone had been a sturdy rogue, and bore traces of his stripes in scars on his body, either from the whip or from other wounds, while yet alive, then after death too his body has these marks visible upon it; or if anyone's limbs were broken or distorted in life, these same effects are manifest in death.
In a word, whatever sort of bodily appearance a man had acquired in life, that is manifest also after his death either wholly or in the main for some time.
And so it seems to me that the same is the case with the soul too, Callicles: when a man's soul is stripped bare of the body, all its natural gifts, and the experiences added to that soul as the result of his various pursuits, are manifest in it.
So when they have arrived in presence of their judge, they of Asia before Rhadamanthus, these Rhadamanthus sets before him and surveys the soul of each, not knowing whose it is;
nay, often when he has laid hold of the Great King or some other prince or potentate, he perceives the utter unhealthiness of his soul, striped all over with the scourge, and a mass of wounds, the work of perjuries and injustice;
where every act has left its smirch upon his soul, where all is awry through falsehood and imposture, and nothing straight because of a nurture that knew not truth: or, as the result of an unbridled course of fastidiousness, insolence, and incontinence, he finds the soul full fraught with disproportion and ugliness.
Beholding this he sends it away in dishonor straight to the place of custody, where on its arrival it is to endure the sufferings that are fitting.
And it is fitting that every one under punishment rightly inflicted on him by another should either be made better and profit thereby, or serve as an example to the rest, that others seeing the sufferings he endures may in fear amend themselves.
Those who are benefited by the punishment they get from gods and men are they who have committed remediable offences; but still it is through bitter throes of pain that they receive their benefit both here and in the nether world; for in no other way can there be riddance of iniquity.
But of those who have done extreme wrong and, as a result of such crimes, have become incurable, of those are the examples made; no longer are they profited at all themselves, since they are incurable, but others are profited who behold them undergoing for their transgressions the greatest, sharpest, and most fearful sufferings evermore, actually hung up as examples there in the infernal dungeon, a spectacle and a lesson to such of the wrongdoers as arrive from time to time.
Among them I say Archelaus also will be found, if what Polus tells us is true, and every other despot of his sort.
And I think, moreover, that most of these examples have come from despots and kings and potentates and public administrators; for these, since they have a free hand, commit the greatest and most impious offences.
Homer also testifies to this;
for he has represented kings and potentates as those who are punished everlastingly in the nether world Tantalus and Sisyphus and Tityus;
but Thersites, or any other private person who was wicked, has been portrayed by none as incurable and therefore subjected to heavy punishment; no doubt because he had not a free hand, and therefore was in fact happier than those who had.
For in fact, Callicles, it is among the powerful that we find the specially wicked men.
Still there is nothing to prevent good men being found even among these, and it deserves our special admiration when they are;
for it is hard, Callicles, and deserving of no slight praise, when a man with a perfectly free hand for injustice lives always a just life.
The men of this sort are but few;
for indeed there have been, and I expect there yet will be, both here and elsewhere, men of honor and excellence in this virtue of administering justly what is committed to their charge.
One in fact there has been whose fame stands high among us and throughout the rest of Greece, Aristeides, son of Lysimachus;
but most of those in power, my excellent friend, prove to be bad.
So, as I was saying, whenever the judge Rhadamanthus has to deal with such a one, he knows nothing else of him at all, neither who he is nor of what descent, but only that he is a wicked person and on perceiving this he sends him away to Tartarus, first setting a mark on him to show whether he deems it a curable or an incurable case; and when the man arrives there he suffers what is fitting.
Sometimes, when he discerns another soul that has lived a holy life in company with truth, a private man's or any others especially, as I claim, Callicles, a philosopher's who has minded his own business and not been a busybody in his lifetime he is struck with admiration and sends it off to the Isles of the Blest.
And exactly the same is the procedure of Aeacus: each of these two holds a rod in his hand as he gives judgement;
but Minor sits as supervisor, distinguished by the golden scepter that he holds, as Odysseus in Homer tells how he saw him
"Holding a golden scepter, speaking dooms to the dead."
Now for my part, Callicles, I am convinced by these accounts, and I consider how I may be able to show my judge that my soul is in the best of health.
So giving the go-by to the honors that most men seek I shall try, by inquiry into the truth, to be really good in as high a degree as I am able, both in my life and, when I come to die, in my death.
And I invite all other men likewise, to the best of my power, and you particularly I invite in return, to this life and this contest,
which I say is worth all other contests on this earth; and I make it a reproach to you, that you will not be able to deliver yourself when your trial comes and the judgement of which I told you just now; but when you go before your judge, the son of Aegina, and he grips you and drags you up, you will gape and feel dizzy there no less than I do here, and some one perhaps will give you, yes, a degrading box on the ear, and will treat you with every kind of contumely.
Possibly, however, you regard this as an old wife's tale, and despise it; and there would be no wonder in our despising it if with all our searching we could somewhere find anything better and truer than this: but as it is, you observe that you three, who are the wisest of the Greeks in our day you and Polus and Gorgias are unable to prove that we ought to live any other life than this, which is evidently advantageous also in the other world.
But among the many statements we have made, while all the rest are refuted this one alone is unshaken
that doing wrong is to be more carefully shunned than suffering it; that above all things a man should study not to seem but to be good both in private and in public;
that if one becomes bad in any respect one must be corrected; that this is good in the second place, next to being just, to become so and to be corrected by paying the penalty; and that every kind of flattery, with regard either to oneself or to others, to few or to many, must be avoided; and that rhetoric is to be used for this one purpose always, of pointing to what is just, and so in every other activity.
Take my advice, therefore, and follow me where, if you once arrive, you will be happy both in life and after life's end, as this account declares.
And allow anyone to contemn you as a fool and foully maltreat you if he chooses; yes, by Heaven, and suffer undaunted the shock of that ignominious cuff;
for you will come to no harm if you be really a good and upright man, practicing virtue.
And afterwards, having practiced it together, we shall in due course, if we deem it right, embark on politics, or proceed to consult on whatever we may think fit, being then better equipped for such counsel than we are now.
For it is disgraceful that men in such a condition as we now appear to be in should put on a swaggering, important air when we never continue to be of the same mind upon the same questions, and those the greatest of all we are so sadly uneducated.
Let us therefore take as our guide the doctrine now disclosed, which indicates to us that this way of life is best to live and die in the practice alike of justice and of all other virtue.
This then let us follow, and to this invite every one else; not that to which you trust yourself and invite me, for it is nothing worth, Callicles.
Meno
Meno
Socrates
Meno's Boy
Anytus
Meno
Can you tell me, Socrates, whether virtue can be taught?
or is acquired by practice, not teaching?
Or if neither by practice nor by learning, whether it comes to mankind by nature or in some other way?
Socrates
Meno, of old the Thessalians were famous and admired among the Greeks for their riding and their riches; but now they have a name, I believe, for wisdom also, especially your friend Aristippus's people, the Larisaeans.
For this you have to thank Gorgias: for when he came to that city he made the leading men of the Aleuadae among them your lover Aristippus and the Thessalians generally enamored of wisdom.
Nay more, he has given you the regular habit of answering any chance question in a fearless, magnificent manner, as befits those who know: for he sets the example of offering himself to be questioned by any Greek who chooses, and on any point one likes, and he has an answer for everybody.
Now in this place, my dear Meno, we have a contrary state of things: a drought of wisdom, as it were, has come on; and it seems as though wisdom had deserted our borders in favour of yours.
You have only to ask one of our people a question such as that, and he will be sure to laugh and say: Stranger, you must think me a specially favoured mortal, to be able to tell whether virtue can be taught, or in what way it comes to one: so far am I from knowing whether it can be taught or not, that I actually do not even know what the thing itself, virtue, is at all.
And I myself, Meno, am in the same case; I share my townsmen's poverty in this matter: I have to reproach myself with an utter ignorance about virtue; and if I do not know what a thing is, how can I know what its nature may be?
Or do you imagine it possible, if one has no cognizance at all of Meno, that one could know whether he is handsome or rich or noble, or the reverse of these?
Do you suppose that one could?
Meno
Not I.
But is it true, Socrates, that you do not even know what virtue is?
Are we to return home with this report of you?
Socrates
Not only this, my friend, but also that I never yet came across anybody who did know, in my opinion.
Meno
What, you did not meet Gorgias when he was here?
Socrates
I did.
Meno
And you didn't consider that he knew?
Socrates
I have not a very good memory, Meno, so I cannot tell at the moment how he struck me then.
It may be that he did know, and that you know what he said: remind me therefore how he expressed it;
or if you like, make your own statement, for I expect you share his views.
Meno
I do.
Socrates
Then let us pass him over, since in fact he is not present, and do you tell me, in heaven's name, what is your own account of virtue.
Speak out frankly, that I may find myself the victim of a most fortunate falsehood, if you and Gorgias prove to have knowledge of it, while I have said that I never yet came across anyone who had.
Meno
Why, there is no difficulty, Socrates, in telling.
First of all, if you take the virtue of a man, it is easily stated that a man's virtue is this that he be competent to manage the affairs of his city, and to manage them so as to benefit his friends and harm his enemies, and to take care to avoid suffering harm himself.
Or take a woman's virtue: there is no difficulty in describing it as the duty of ordering the house well, looking after the property indoors, and obeying her husband.
And the child has another virtue one for the female, and one for the male; and there is another for elderly men one, if you like, for freemen, and yet another for slaves.
And there are very many other virtues besides, so that one cannot be at a loss to explain what virtue is; for it is according to each activity and age that every one of us, in whatever we do, has his virtue; and the same, I take it, Socrates, will hold also of vice.
Socrates
I seem to be in a most lucky way, Meno; for in seeking one virtue I have discovered a whole swarm of virtues there in your keeping.
Now, Meno, to follow this figure of a swarm, suppose I should ask you what is the real nature of the bee, and you replied that there are many different kinds of bees, and I rejoined: Do you say it is by being bees that they are of many and various kinds and differ from each other, or does their difference lie not in that, but in something else for example, in their beauty or size or some other quality?
Tell me, what would be your answer to this question?
Meno
Why, this that they do not differ, as bees, the one from the other.
Socrates
And if I went on to say: Well now, there is this that I want you to tell me, Meno: what do you call the quality by which they do not differ, but are all alike?
You could find me an answer, I presume?
Meno
I could.
Socrates
And likewise also with the virtues, however many and various they may be, they all have one common character whereby they are virtues, and on which one would of course be wise to keep an eye when one is giving a definitive answer to the question of what virtue really is.
You take my meaning, do you not?
Meno
My impression is that I do; but still I do not yet grasp the meaning of the question as I could wish.
Socrates
Is it only in the case of virtue, do you think, Meno, that one can say there is one kind belonging to a man, another to a woman, and so on with the rest, or is it just the same, too, in the case of health and size and strength?
Do you consider that there is one health for a man, and another for a woman?
Or, wherever we find health, is it of the same character universally, in a man or in anyone else?
Meno
I think that health is the same, both in man and in woman.
Socrates
Then is it not so with size and strength also?
If a woman is strong, she will be strong by reason of the same form and the same strength;
by "the same" I mean that strength does not differ as strength, whether it be in a man or in a woman.
Or do you think there is any difference?
Meno
I do not.
Socrates
And will virtue, as virtue, differ at all whether it be in a child or in an elderly person, in a woman or in a man?
Meno
I feel somehow, Socrates, that here we cease to be on the same ground as in those other cases.
Socrates
Why, were you not saying that a man's virtue is to manage a state well, and a woman's a house?
Meno
I was.
Socrates
And is it possible to manage a state well, or a house, or anything at all, if you do not manage it temperately and justly?
Meno
Surely not.
Socrates
Then whoever manages temperately and justly will manage with temperance and justice?
Meno
That must be.
Socrates
Then both the woman and the man require the same qualities of justice and temperance, if they are to be good.
Meno
Evidently.
Socrates
And what of a child or an old man?
Can they ever hope to be good if they are intemperate and unjust?
Meno
Surely not.
Socrates
Only if they are temperate and just?
Meno
Yes.
Socrates
So all mankind are good in the same way; for they become good when they acquire the same qualities.
Meno
So it seems.
Socrates
And I presume, if they had not the same virtue, they would not be good in the same way.
Meno
No, indeed.
Socrates
Seeing then that it is the same virtue in all cases, try and tell me, if you can recollect, what Gorgias and you in agreement with him say it is.
Meno
Simply that it is the power of governing mankind
if you want some single description to cover all cases.
Socrates
That is just what I am after.
But is virtue the same in a child, Meno, and in a slave an ability to govern each his master?
And do you think he who governed would still be a slave?
Meno
I should say certainly not, Socrates.
Socrates
No, indeed, it would be unlikely, my excellent friend.
And again, consider this further point:
you say it is "to be able to govern"; shall we not add to that "justly, not unjustly"?
Meno
Yes, I think so; for justice, Socrates, is virtue.
Socrates
Virtue, Meno, or a virtue?
Meno
What do you mean by that?
Socrates
What I would in any other case.
To take roundness, for instance; I should call it a figure, and not figure pure and simple.
And I should name it so because there are other figures as well.
Meno
You would be quite right just as I say there are other virtues besides justice.
Socrates
What are they?
Tell me.
In the same way as I can tell you of other figures, if you request me, so do you tell me of other virtues.
Meno
Well then, courage, I consider, is a virtue, and temperance, and wisdom, and loftiness of mind; and there are a great many others.
Socrates
Once more, Meno, we are in the same plight: again we have found a number of virtues when we were looking for one, though not in the same way as we did just now; but the one that runs through them all, this we are not able to find.
Meno
No, for I am not yet able, Socrates, to follow your line of search, and find a single virtue common to all, as one can in other cases.
Socrates
And no wonder; but I will make an effort, so far as I can, to help us onward.
You understand, of course, that this principle of mine applies to everything:
if someone asked you the question I put to you just now: What is figure, Meno?
and you replied: Roundness; and then he said, as I did: Is roundness figure or a figure?
I suppose you would answer: A figure.
Meno
Certainly.
Socrates
And for this reason that there are other figures as well?
Meno
Yes.
Socrates
And if he went on to ask you of what sort they were, you would tell him?
Meno
I would.
Socrates
And if he asked likewise what color is, and on your answering "white" your questioner then rejoined:
Is "white" color or a color?
your reply would be: A color; because there are other colors besides.
Meno
It would.
Socrates
And if he bade you mention other colors, you would tell him of others that are colors just as much as white?
Meno
Yes.
Socrates
Now suppose that, like me, he pursued the argument and said: We are always arriving at a variety of things, but let me have no more of that: since you call these many things by one single name, and say they are figures, every one of them, even when they are opposed to one another, tell me what is that which comprises round and straight alike, and which you call figure including straight equally with round under that term.
For that is your statement, is it not?
Meno
It is.
Socrates
And in making it, do you mean to say that round is no more round than straight, or straight no more straight than round?
Meno
No, to be sure, Socrates.
Socrates
What you mean is that the round shape is no more a figure than the straight, or the straight than the round.
Meno
Quite right.
Socrates
Then what can this thing be, which bears the name of figure?
Try and tell me.
Suppose that, on being asked this question by someone, either about figure or about color, you had replied: Why, I don't so much as understand what you want, sir, or even know what you are saying:
he might well have shown surprise, and said: Do you not understand that I am looking for that which is the same common element in all these things?
Or would you still be unable to reply, Meno, if you were approached on other terms, and were asked: What is it that is common to the round and the straight and everything else that you call figures the same in all?
Try and tell me it will be good practice for your answer about virtue.
Meno
No, it is you who must answer, Socrates.
Socrates
You wish me to do you the favour?
Meno
By all means.
Socrates
And then you will agree to take your turn and answer me on virtue?
Meno
I will.
Socrates
Well then, I must make the effort, for it is worth our while.
Meno
Certainly.
Socrates
Come now, let me try and tell you what figure is.
Just consider if you accept this description of it: figure, let us say, is the only existing thing that is found always following color.
Are you satisfied, or are you looking for something different?
I am sure I should be content with a similar account of virtue from you.
Meno
But it is such a silly one, Socrates.
Socrates
How do you mean?
Meno
Well, figure, as I understand by your account, is what always follows color.
Very good; but if some one said he did not know color, and was in the same difficulty about it as about figure, what answer do you suppose would have come from you?
Socrates
The truth, from me; and if my questioner were a professor of the eristic and contentious sort, I should say to him: I have made my statement; if it is wrong, your business is to examine and refute it.
But if, like you and me on this occasion, we were friends and chose to have a discussion together, I should have to reply in some milder tone more suited to dialectic.
The more dialectical way, I suppose, is not merely to answer what is true, but also to make use of those points which the questioned person acknowledges he knows.
And this is the way in which I shall now try to argue with you.
Tell me, is there something you call an end?
Such a thing, I mean, as a limit, or extremity I use all these terms in the same sense, though I daresay Prodicus might quarrel with us.
But you, I am sure, refer to a thing as terminated or ended: something of that sort is what I mean nothing complicated.
Meno
Yes, I do, and I think I grasp your meaning.
Socrates
Well then, you speak of a surface, and also of a solid the terms employed in geometrical problems?
Meno
I do.
Socrates
So now you are able to comprehend from all this what I mean by figure.
In every instance of figure I call that figure in which the solid ends; and I may put that more succinctly by saying that figure is "limit of solid."
Meno
And what do you say of color, Socrates?
Socrates
How overbearing of you, Meno, to press an old man with demands for answers, when you will not trouble yourself to recollect and tell me what account Gorgias gives of virtue!
Meno
When you have answered my question, Socrates, I will answer yours.
Socrates
One might tell even blindfolded, Meno, by the way you discuss, that you are handsome and still have lovers.
Meno
Why so?
Socrates
Because you invariably speak in a peremptory tone, after the fashion of spoilt beauties, holding as they do a despotic power so long as their bloom is on them.
You have also, I daresay, made a note of my weakness for handsome people.
So I will indulge you, and answer.
Meno
You must certainly indulge me.
Socrates
Then would you like me to answer you in the manner of Gorgias, which you would find easiest to follow?
Meno
I should like that, of course.
Socrates
Do not both of you say there are certain effluences of existent things, as Empedocles held?
Meno
Certainly.
Socrates
And passages into which and through which the effluences pass?
Meno
To be sure.
Socrates
And some of the effluences fit into various passages, while some are too small or too large?
Meno
That is so.
Socrates
And further, there is what you call sight?
Meno
Yes.
Socrates
So now "conceive my meaning," as Pindar says:
color is an effluence of figures, commensurate with sight and sensible.
Meno
Your answer, Socrates, seems to me excellently put.
Socrates
Yes, for I expect you find its terms familiar; and at the same time I fancy you observe that it enables you to tell what sound and smell are, and numerous other things of the kind.
Meno
Certainly.
Socrates
It is an answer in the high poetic style, Meno, and so more agreeable to you than that about figure.
Meno
Yes, it is.
Socrates
But yet, son of Alexidemus, I am inclined to think the other was the better of the two; and I believe you also would prefer it, if you were not compelled, as you were saying yesterday, to go away before the mysteries, and could stay awhile and be initiated.
Meno
But I should stay, Socrates, if you would give me many such answers.
Socrates
Well then, I will spare no endeavor, both for your sake and for my own, to continue in that style; but I fear I may not succeed in keeping for long on that level.
But come now, you in your turn must try and fulfil your promise by telling me what virtue is in a general way; and you must stop producing a plural from the singular, as the wags say whenever one breaks something, but leave virtue whole and sound, and tell me what it is.
The pattern you have now got from me.
Meno
Well, in my view, Socrates, virtue is, in the poet's words, "to rejoice in things honorable and be able for them"; and that, I say, is virtue to desire what is honorable and be able to procure it.
Socrates
Do you say that he who desires the honorable is desirous of the good?
Meno
Certainly.
Socrates
Implying that there are some who desire the evil, and others the good?
Do not all men, in your opinion, my dear sir, desire the good?
Meno
I think not.
Socrates
There are some who desire the evil?
Meno
Yes.
Socrates
Thinking the evil to be good, do you mean, or actually recognizing it to be evil, and desiring it nevertheless?
Meno
Both, I believe.
Socrates
Do you really believe, Meno, that a man knows the evil to be evil, and still desires it?
Meno
Certainly.
Socrates
What do you mean by "desires"?
Desires the possession of it?
Meno
Yes; what else could it be?
Socrates
And does he think the evil benefits him who gets it, or does he know that it harms him who has it?
Meno
There are some who think the evil is a benefit, and others who know that it does harm.
Socrates
And, in your opinion, do those who think the evil a benefit know that it is evil?
Meno
I do not think that at all.
Socrates
Obviously those who are ignorant of the evil do not desire it, but only what they supposed to be good, though it is really evil; so that those who are ignorant of it and think it good are really desiring the good.
Is not that so?
Meno
It would seem to be so in their case.
Socrates
Well now, I presume those who, as you say, desire the evil, and consider that the evil harms him who gets it, know that they will be harmed by it?
Meno
They needs must.
Socrates
But do they not hold that those who are harmed are miserable in proportion to the harm they suffer?
Meno
That too must be.
Socrates
And are not the miserable ill-starred?
Meno
I think so.
Socrates
Then is there anyone who wishes to be miserable and ill-starred?
Meno
I do not suppose there is, Socrates.
Socrates
No one, then, Meno, desires evil, if no one desires to be such an one:
for what is being miserable but desiring evil and obtaining it?
Meno
It seems that what you say is true, Socrates, and that nobody desires evil.
Socrates
Well now, you were saying a moment ago that virtue is the desire and ability for good?
Meno
Yes, I was.
Socrates
One part of the statement the desire belongs to our common nature, and in this respect one man is no better than another?
Meno
Apparently.
Socrates
But it is plain that if one man is not better than another in this, he must be superior in the ability.
Meno
Certainly.
Socrates
Then virtue, it seems by your account, is ability to procure goods.
Meno
I entirely agree, Socrates, with the view which you now take of the matter.
Socrates
Then let us see whether your statement is true in another respect; for very likely you may be right.
You say virtue is the ability to procure goods?
Meno
I do.
Socrates
And do you not mean by goods such things as health and wealth?
Meno
Yes, and I include the acquisition of gold and silver, and of state honors and offices.
Socrates
Are there any things besides this sort, that you class as goods?
Meno
No, I refer only to everything of that sort.
Socrates
Very well: procuring gold and silver is virtue, according to Meno, the ancestral friend of the Great King.
Tell me, do you add to such procuring, Meno, that it is to be done justly and piously, or is this indifferent to you, but even though a man procures these things unjustly, do you call them virtue all the same?
Meno
Surely not, Socrates.
Socrates
Rather, vice.
Meno
Yes, of course.
Socrates
Then it seems that justice or temperance or holiness or some other part of virtue must accompany the procuring of these things; otherwise it will not be virtue, though it provides one with goods.
Meno
Yes, for how, without these, could it be virtue?
Socrates
And not to procure gold and silver, when it would be unjust what we call the want of such things is virtue, is it not?
Meno
Apparently.
Socrates
So the procuring of this sort of goods will be no more virtue than the want of them; but it seems that whatever comes accompanied by justice will be virtue, and whatever comes without any such quality, vice.
Meno
I agree that it must be as you say.
Socrates
And were we saying a little while ago that each of these things was a part of virtue justice and temperance and the rest of them?
Meno
Yes.
Socrates
And here you are, Meno, making fun of me?
Meno
How so, Socrates?
Socrates
Because after my begging you not to break up virtue into small change, and giving you a pattern on which you should answer, you have ignored all this, and now tell me that virtue is the ability to procure good things with justice; and this, you tell me, is a part of virtue?
Meno
I do.
Socrates
Then it follows from your own admission that doing whatever one does with a part of virtue is itself virtue; for you say that justice is a part of virtue, and so is each of such qualities.
You ask the meaning of my remark.
It is that after my requesting you to speak of virtue as a whole, you say not a word as to what it is in itself, but tell me that every action is virtue provided that it is done with a part of virtue; as though you had told me what virtue is in the whole, and I must understand it forthwith when you are really splitting it up into fragments!
I think therefore that you must face the same question all over again, my dear Meno What is virtue? if we are to be told that every action accompanied by a part of virtue is virtue; for that is the meaning of the statement that every action accompanied by justice is virtue.
Or do you not agree that you have to meet the same question afresh?
Do you suppose that anyone can know a part of virtue when he does not know virtue itself?
Meno
No, I do not.
Socrates
And I daresay you remember, when I answered you a while ago about figure, how we rejected the sort of answer that attempts to proceed in terms which are still under inquiry and has not yet been admitted.
Meno
Yes, and we were right in rejecting it, Socrates.
Socrates
Well then, my good sir, you must not in your turn suppose that while the nature of virtue as a whole is still under inquiry you will explain it to anyone by replying in terms of its parts, or by any other statement on the same lines: you will only have to face the same question over again What is this virtue, of which you are speaking all the time?
Or do you see no force in what I say?
Meno
I think what you say is right.
Socrates
Then answer me again from the beginning: what do both you and your associate say that virtue is?
Meno
Socrates, I used to be told, before I began to meet you, that yours was just a case of being in doubt yourself and making others doubt also:
and so now I find you are merely bewitching me with your spells and incantations, which have reduced me to utter perplexity.
And if I am indeed to have my jest, I consider that both in your appearance and in other respects you are extremely like the flat torpedo sea-fish;
for it benumbs anyone who approaches and touches it, and something of the sort is what I find you have done to me now.
For in truth I feel my soul and my tongue quite benumbed, and I am at a loss what answer to give you.
And yet on countless occasions I have made abundant speeches on virtue to various people and very good speeches they were, so I thought but now I cannot say one word as to what it is.
You are well advised, I consider, in not voyaging or taking a trip away from home; for if you went on like this as a stranger in any other city you would very likely be taken up for a wizard.
Socrates
You are a rogue, Meno, and had almost deceived me.
Meno
How is that, Socrates?
Socrates
I perceive your aim in thus comparing me.
Meno
What was it?
Socrates
That I might compare you in return.
One thing I know about all handsome people is this they delight in being compared to something.
They do well over it, since fine features, I suppose, must have fine similes.
But I am not for playing your game.
As for me, if the torpedo is torpid itself while causing others to be torpid, I am like it, but not otherwise.
For it is not from any sureness in myself that I cause others to doubt: it is from being in more doubt than anyone else that I cause doubt in others.
So now, for my part, I have no idea what virtue is, whilst you, though perhaps you may have known before you came in touch with me, are now as good as ignorant of it also.
But none the less I am willing to join you in examining it and inquiring into its nature.
Meno
Why, on what lines will you look, Socrates, for a thing of whose nature you know nothing at all?
Pray, what sort of thing, amongst those that you know not, will you treat us to as the object of your search?
Or even supposing, at the best, that you hit upon it, how will you know it is the thing you did not know?
Socrates
I understand the point you would make, Meno.
Do you see what a captious argument you are introducing that, forsooth, a man cannot inquire either about what he knows or about whit he does not know?
For he cannot inquire about what he knows, because he knows it, and in that case is in no need of inquiry; nor again can lie inquire about what he does not know, since he does not know about what he is to inquire.
Meno
Now does it seem to you to be a good argument, Socrates?
Socrates
It does not.
Meno
Can you explain how not?
Socrates
I can; for I have heard from wise men and women who told of things divine that
Meno
What was it they said ?
Socrates
Something true, as I thought, and admirable.
Meno
What was it?
And who were the speakers?
Socrates
They were certain priests and priestesses who have studied so as to be able to give a reasoned account of their ministry;
and Pindar also and many another poet of heavenly gifts.
As to their words, they are these: mark now, if you judge them to be true.
They say that the soul of man is immortal, and at one time comes to an end, which is called dying, and at another is born again, but never perishes.
Consequently one ought to live all one's life in the utmost holiness.
Seeing then that the soul is immortal and has been born many times, and has beheld all things both in this world and in the nether realms, she has acquired knowledge of all and everything; so that it is no wonder that she should be able to recollect all that she knew before about virtue and other things.
For as all nature is akin, and the soul has learned all things, there is no reason why we should not, by remembering but one single thing an act which men call learning discover everything else, if we have courage and faint not in the search; since, it would seem, research and learning are wholly recollection.
So we must not hearken to that captious argument:
it would make us idle, and is pleasing only to the indolent ear, whereas the other makes us energetic and inquiring.
Putting my trust in its truth, I am ready to inquire with you into the nature of virtue.
Meno
Yes, Socrates, but what do you mean by saying that we do not learn, and that what we call learning is recollection?
Can you instruct me that this is so?
Socrates
I remarked just now, Meno, that you are a rogue and so here you are asking if I can instruct you, when I say there is no teaching but only recollection: you hope that I may be caught contradicting myself forthwith.
Meno
I assure you, Socrates; that was not my intention I only spoke from habit.
But if you can somehow prove to me that it is as you say, pray do so.
Socrates
It is no easy matter, but still I am willing to try my best for your sake.
Just call one of your own troop of attendants there, whichever one you please, that he may serve for my demonstration.
Meno
Certainly.
You, I say, come here.
Socrates
He is a Greek, I suppose, and speaks Greek?
Meno
Oh yes, to be sure born in the house.
Socrates
Now observe closely whether he strikes you as recollecting or as learning from me.
Meno
I will.
Socrates
Tell me, boy, do you know that a square figure is like this?
Boy
I do.
Socrates
Now, a square figure has these lines, four in number, all equal?
Boy
Certainly.
Socrates
And these, drawn through the middle, are equal too, are they not?
Boy
Yes.
Socrates
And a figure of this sort may be larger or smaller?
Boy
To be sure.
Socrates
Now if this side were two feet and that also two, how many feet would the whole be?
Or let me put it thus: if one way it were two feet, and only one foot the other, of course the space would be two feet taken once ?
Boy
Yes.
Socrates
But as it is two feet also on that side, it must be twice two feet?
Boy
It is.
Socrates
Then the space is twice two feet?
Boy
Yes.
Socrates
Well, how many are twice two feet?
Count and tell me.
Boy
Four, Socrates.
Socrates
And might there not be another figure twice the size of this, but of the same sort, with all its sides equal like this one?
Boy
Yes.
Socrates
Then how many feet will it be?
Boy
Eight.
Socrates
Come now, try and tell me how long will each side of that figure be.
This one is two feet long: what will be the side of the other, which is double in size?
Boy
Clearly, Socrates, double.
Socrates
Do you observe, Meno, that I am not teaching the boy anything, but merely asking him each time?
And now he supposes that he knows about the line required to make a figure of eight square feet; or do you not think he does?
Meno
I do.
Socrates
Well, does he know?
Meno
Certainly not.
Socrates
He just supposes it, from the double size required?
Meno
Yes.
Socrates
Now watch his progress in recollecting, by the proper use of memory.
Tell me, do you say we get the double space from the double line?
The space I speak of is not long one way and short the other, but must be equal each way like this one, while being double its size eight square feet.
Now see if you still think we get this from a double length of line.
Boy
I do.
Socrates
Well, this line is doubled, if we add here another of the same length?
Boy
Certainly.
Socrates
And you say we shall get our eight-foot space from four lines of this length?
Boy
Yes.
Socrates
Then let us describe the square, drawing four equal lines of that length.
This will be what you say is the eight-foot figure, will it not?
Boy
Certainly.
Socrates
And here, contained in it, have we not four squares, each of which is equal to this space of four feet?
Boy
Yes.
Socrates
Then how large is the whole?
Four times that space, is it not?
Boy
It must be.
Socrates
And is four times equal to double?
Boy
No, to be sure.
Socrates
But how much is it?
Boy
Fourfold.
Socrates
Thus, from the double-sized line, boy, we get a space, not of double, but of fourfold size.
Boy
That is true.
Socrates
And if it is four times four it is sixteen, is it not?
Boy
Yes.
Socrates
What line will give us a space of eight feet?
This one gives us a fourfold space, does it not?
Boy
It does.
Socrates
And a space of four feet is made from this line of half the length?
Boy
Yes.
Socrates
Very well; and is not a space of eight feet double the size of this one, and half the size of this other?
Boy
Yes.
Socrates
Will it not be made from a line longer than the one of these, and shorter than the other?
Boy
I think so.
Socrates
Excellent: always answer just what you think.
Now tell me, did we not draw this line two feet, and that four?
Boy
Yes.
Socrates
Then the line on the side of the eight-foot figure should be more than this of two feet, and less than the other of four?
Boy
It should.
Socrates
Try and tell me how much you would say it is.
Boy
Three feet.
Socrates
Then if it is to be three feet, we shall add on a half to this one, and so make it three feet?
For here we have two, and here one more, and so again on that side there are two, and another one; and that makes the figure of which you speak.
Boy
Yes.
Socrates
Now if it be three this way and three that way, the whole space will be thrice three feet, will it not?
Boy
So it seems.
Socrates
And thrice three feet are how many?
Boy
Nine.
Socrates
And how many feet was that double one to be?
Boy
Eight.
Socrates
So we fail to get our eight-foot figure from this three-foot line.
Boy
Yes, indeed.
Socrates
But from what line shall we get it?
Try and tell us exactly; and if you would rather not reckon it out, just show what line it is.
Boy
Well, on my word, Socrates, I for one do not know.
Socrates
There now, Meno, do you observe who progress he has already made in his recollection?
At first he did not know what is the line that forms the figure of eight feet, and he does not know even now: but at any rate he thought he knew then, and confidently answered as though he knew, and was aware of no difficulty; whereas now he feels the difficulty he is in, and besides not knowing does not think he knows.
Meno
That is true.
Socrates
And is he not better off in respect of the matter which he did not know?
Meno
I think that too is so.
Socrates
Now, by causing him to doubt and giving him the torpedo's shock, have we done him any harm?
Meno
I think not.
Socrates
And we have certainly given him some assistance, it would seem, towards finding out the truth of the matter: for now he will push on in the search gladly, as lacking knowledge; whereas then he would have been only too ready to suppose he was right in saying, before any number of people any number of times, that the double space must have a line of double the length for its side.
Meno
It seems so.
Socrates
Now do you imagine he would have attempted to inquire or learn what he thought he knew, when he did not know it, until he had been reduced to the perplexity of realizing that he did not know, and had felt a craving to know?
Meno
I think not, Socrates.
Socrates
Then the torpedo's shock was of advantage to him?
Meno
I think so.
Socrates
Now you should note how, as a result of this perplexity, he will go on and discover something by joint inquiry with me, while I merely ask questions and do not teach him; and be on the watch to see if at any point you find me teaching him or expounding to him, instead of questioning him on his opinions.
Tell me, boy: here we have a square of four feet, have we not?
You understand?
Boy
Yes.
Socrates
And here we add another square equal to it?
Boy
Yes.
Socrates
And here a third, equal to either of them?
Boy
Yes.
Socrates
Now shall we fill up this vacant space in the corner?
Boy
By all means.
Socrates
So here we must have four equal spaces?
Boy
Yes.
Socrates
Well now, how many times larger is this whole space than this other?
Boy
Four times.
Socrates
But it was to have been only twice, you remember?
Boy
To be sure.
Socrates
And does this line, drawn from corner to corner, cut in two each of these spaces?
Boy
Yes.
Socrates
And have we here four equal lines containing this space?
Boy
We have.
Socrates
Now consider how large this space is.
Boy
I do not understand.
Socrates
Has not each of the inside lines cut off half of each of these four spaces?
Boy
Yes.
Socrates
And how many spaces of that size are there in this part?
Boy
Four.
Socrates
And how many in this?
Boy
Two.
Socrates
And four is how many times two?
Boy
Twice.
Socrates
And how many feet is this space?
Boy
Eight feet.
Socrates
From what line do we get this figure?
Boy
From this.
Socrates
From the line drawn corner-wise across the (our-foot figure?
Boy
Yes.
Socrates
The professors call it the diagonal: so if the diagonal is its name, then according to you, Meno's boy, the double space is the square of the diagonal.
Boy
Yes, certainly it is, Socrates.
Socrates
What do you think, Meno?
Was there any opinion that he did not give as an answer of his own thought?
Meno
No, they were all his own.
Socrates
But you see, he did not know, as we were saying a while since.
Meno
That is true.
Socrates
Yet he had in him these opinions, had he not?
Meno
Yes.
Socrates
So that he who does not know about any matters, whatever they be, may have true opinions on such matters, about which he knows nothing?
Meno
Apparently.
Socrates
And at this moment those opinions have just been stirred up in him, like a dream; but if he were repeatedly asked these same questions in a variety of forms, you know he will have in the end as exact an understanding of them as anyone.
Meno
So it seems.
Socrates
Without anyone having taught him, and only through questions put to him, he will understand, recovering the knowledge out of himself?
Meno
Yes.
Socrates
And is not this recovery of knowledge, in himself and by himself, recollection?
Meno
Certainly.
Socrates
And must he not have either once acquired or always had the knowledge he now has?
Meno
Yes.
Socrates
Now if he always had it, he was always in a state of knowing; and if he acquired it all some time, he could not have acquired it in this life.
Or has someone taught him geometry?
You see, he can do the same as this with all geometry and every branch of knowledge.
Now, can anyone have taught him all this?
You ought surely to know, especially as he was born and bred in your house.
Meno
Well, I know that no one has ever taught him.
Socrates
And has he these opinions, or has he not?
Meno
He must have them, Socrates, evidently.
Socrates
And if he did not acquire them in this present life, is it not obvious at once that he had them and learnt them during some other time?
Meno
Apparently.
Socrates
And this must have been the time when he was not a human being?
Meno
Yes.
Socrates
So if in both of these periods when he was and was not a human being he has had true opinions in him which have only to be awakened by questioning to become knowledge, his soul must have had this cognizance throughout all time?
For clearly he has always either been or not been a human being.
Meno
Evidently.
Socrates
And if the truth of all things that are is always in our soul, then the soul must be immortal; so that you should take heart and, whatever you do not happen to know at present that is, what you do not remember you must endeavor to search out and recollect?
Meno
What you say commends itself to me, Socrates, I know not how.
Socrates
And so it does to me, Meno.
Most of the points I have made in support of my argument are not such as I can confidently assert; but that the belief in the duty of inquiring after what we do not know will make us better and braver and less helpless than the notion that there is not even a possibility of discovering what we do not know, nor any duty of inquiring after it this is a point for which I am determined to do battle, so far as I am able, both in word and deed.
Meno
There also I consider that you speak aright, Socrates.
Socrates
Then since we are of one mind as to the duty of inquiring into what one does not know, do you agree to our attempting a joint inquiry into the nature of virtue?
Meno
By all means.
But still, Socrates, for my part I would like best of all to examine that question I asked at first, and hear your view as to whether in pursuing it we are to regard it as a thing to be taught, or as a gift of nature to mankind, or as arriving to them in some other way which I should be glad to know.
Socrates
Had I control over you, Meno, as over myself, we should not have begun considering whether virtue can or cannot be taught until we had first inquired into the main question of what it is.
But as you do not so much as attempt to control yourself you are so fond of your liberty and both attempt and hold control over me, I will yield to your request what else am I to do?
So it seems we are to consider what sort of thing it is of which we do not yet know what it is!
Well, the least you can do is to relax just a little of your authority, and allow the question whether virtue comes by teaching or some other way to be examined by means of hypothesis.
I mean by hypothesis what the geometricians often do in dealing with a question put to them; for example, whether a certain area is capable of being inscribed as a triangular space in a given circle:
they reply "I cannot yet tell whether it has that capability; but I think, if I may put it so, that I have a certain helpful hypothesis for the problem, and it is as follows: If this area is such that when you apply it to the given line of the circle you find it falls short by a space similar to that which you have just applied, then I take it you have one consequence, and if it is impossible for it to fall so, then some other.
Accordingly I wish to put a hypothesis, before I state our conclusion as regards inscribing this figure in the circle by saying whether it is impossible or not."
In the same way with regard to our question about virtue, since we do not know either what it is or what kind of thing it may be, we had best make use of a hypothesis in considering whether it can be taught or not, as thus: what kind of thing must virtue be in the class of mental properties, so as to be teachable or not?
In the first place, if it is something dissimilar or similar to knowledge, is it taught or not or, as we were saying just now, remembered?
Let us have no disputing about the choice of a name: is it taught?
Or is not this fact plain to everyone that the one and only thing taught to men is knowledge?
Meno
I agree to that.
Socrates
Then if virtue is a kind of knowledge, clearly it must be taught?
Meno
Certainly.
Socrates
So you see we have made short work of this question if virtue belongs to one class of things it is teachable, and if to another, it is not.
Meno
To be sure.
Socrates
The next question, it would seem, that we have to consider is whether virtue is knowledge, or of another kind than knowledge.
Meno
I should say that is the next thing we have to consider.
Socrates
Well now, surely we call virtue a good thing, do we not, and our hypothesis stands, that it is good?
Meno
Certainly we do.
Socrates
Then if there is some good apart and separable from knowledge, it may be that virtue is not a kind of knowledge; but if there is nothing good that is not embraced by knowledge, our suspicion that virtue is a kind of knowledge would be well founded.
Meno
Quite so.
Socrates
Now it is by virtue that we are good?
Meno
Yes.
Socrates
And if good, profitable; for all good things are profitable,
are they not?
Meno
Yes.
Socrates
So virtue is profitable?
Meno
That must follow from what has been admitted.
Socrates
Then let us see, in particular instances, what sort of things they are that profit us.
Health, let us say, and strength, and beauty, and wealth these and their like we call profitable, do we not?
Meno
Yes.
Socrates
But these same things, we admit, actually harm us at times; or do you dispute that statement?
Meno
No, I agree.
Socrates
Consider now, what is the guiding condition in each case that makes them at one time profitable, and at another harmful.
Are they not profitable when the use of them is right, and harmful when it is not?
Meno
To be sure.
Socrates
Then let us consider next the goods of the soul:
by these you understand temperance, justice, courage, intelligence, memory, magnanimity, and so forth?
Meno
Yes.
Socrates
Now tell me; such of these as you think are not knowledge, but different from knowledge do they not sometimes harm us, and sometimes profit us?
For example, courage, if it is courage apart from prudence, and only a sort of boldness: when a man is bold without sense, he is harmed; but when he has sense at the same time, he is profited, is he not?
Meno
Yes.
Socrates
And the same holds of temperance and intelligence: things learnt and coordinated with the aid of sense are profitable, but without sense they are harmful?
Meno
Most certainly.
Socrates
And in brief, all the undertakings and endurances of the soul, when guided by wisdom, end in happiness, but when folly guides, in the opposite?
Meno
So it seems.
Socrates
Then if virtue is something that is in the soul, and must needs be profitable, it ought to be wisdom, seeing that all the properties of the soul are in themselves neither profitable nor harmful, but are made either one or the other by the addition of wisdom or folly;
and hence, by this argument, virtue being profitable must be a sort of wisdom.
Meno
I agree.
Socrates
Then as to the other things, wealth and the like, that we mentioned just now as being sometimes good and sometimes harmful are not these also made profitable or harmful by the soul according as she uses and guides them rightly or wrongly: just as, in the case of the soul generally, we found that the guidance of wisdom makes profitable the properties of the soul, while that of folly makes them harmful?
Meno
Certainly.
Socrates
And the wise soul guides rightly, and the foolish erroneously?
Meno
That is so.
Socrates
Then may we assert this as a universal rule, that in man all other things depend upon the soul, while the things of the soul herself depend upon wisdom, if they are to be good; and so by this account the profitable will be wisdom, and virtue, we say, is profitable?
Meno
Certainly.
Socrates
Hence we conclude that virtue is either wholly or partly wisdom?
Meno
It seems to me that your statement, Socrates, is excellent.
Socrates
Then if this is so, good men cannot be good by nature.
Meno
I think not.
Socrates
No, for then, I presume, we should have had this result: if good men were so by nature, we surely should have had men able to discern who of the young were good by nature, and on their pointing them out we should have taken them over and kept them safe in the citadel, having set our mark on them far rather than on our gold treasure, in order that none might have tampered with them, and that when they came to be of age, they might be useful to their country.
Meno
Yes, most likely, Socrates.
Socrates
So since it is not by nature that the good become good, is it by education?
Meno
We must now conclude, I think, that it is; and plainly, Socrates, on our hypothesis that virtue is knowledge, it must be taught.
Socrates
Yes, I daresay; but what if we were not right in agreeing to that?
Meno
Well, it seemed to be a correct statement a moment ago.
Socrates
Yes, but not only a moment ago must it seem correct, but now also and hereafter, if it is to be at all sound.
Meno
Why, what reason have you to make a difficulty about it, and feel a doubt as to virtue being knowledge?
Socrates
I will tell you, Meno.
I do not withdraw as incorrect the statement that it is taught, if it is knowledge; but as to its being knowledge, consider if you think I have grounds for misgiving.
For tell me now: if anything at all, not merely virtue, is teachable, must there not be teachers and learners of it?
Meno
I think so.
Socrates
Then also conversely, if a thing had neither teachers nor learners, we should be right in surmising that it could not be taught?
Meno
That is so: but do you think there are no teachers of virtue?
Socrates
I must say I have often inquired whether there were any, but for all my pains I cannot find one.
And yet many have shared the search with me, and particularly those persons whom I regard as best qualified for the task.
But look, Meno: here, at the very moment when he was wanted, we have Anytus sitting down beside us, to take his share in our quest.
And we may well ask his assistance; for our friend Anytus, in the first place, is the son of a wise and wealthy father, Anthemion, who became rich not by a fluke or a gift like that man the other day, Ismenias the Theban, who has come into the fortune of a Polycrates but as the product of his own skill and industry; and secondly, he has the name of being in general a well-conducted, mannerly person, not insolent towards his fellow-citizens or arrogant and annoying;
and further, he gave his son a good upbringing and education, as the Athenian people think, for they choose him for the highest offices.
This is the sort of man to whom one may look for help in the inquiry as to whether there are teachers of virtue or not, and who they may be.
So please, Anytus, join with me and your family-friend Meno in our inquiry about this matter who can be the teachers.
Consider it thus: if we wanted Meno here to be a good doctor, to whom should we send him for instruction?
Would it not be to the doctors?
Anytus
Certainly.
Socrates
And if we wanted him to become a good cobbler, should we not send him to the cobblers?
Anytus
Yes.
Socrates
And in the same way with every other trade?
Anytus
Certainly.
Socrates
Now let me ask you something more about these same instances.
We should be right, we say, in sending him to the doctors if we wanted him to be a doctor.
When we say this, do we mean that we should be wise in sending him to those who profess the art rather than those who do not, and to those who charge a fee for the particular thing they do, as avowed teachers of anyone who wishes to come and learn of them?
If these were our reasons, should we not be right in sending him?
Anytus
Yes.
Socrates
And the same would hold in the case of flute-playing, and so on with the rest?
What folly, when we wanted to make someone a flute-player, to refuse to send him to the professed teachers of the art, who charge a regular fee, and to bother with requests for instruction other people who neither set up to be teachers nor have a single pupil in that sort of study which we expect him, when sent, to pursue!
Do you not consider this would be grossly unreasonable?
Anytus
Yes, on my word, I do, and stupid to boot.
Socrates
Quite right.
And now there is an opportunity of your joining me in a consultation on my friend Meno here.
He has been declaring to me ever so long, Anytus, that he desires to have that wisdom and virtue whereby men keep their house or their city in good order, and honor their parents, and know when to welcome and when to speed citizens and strangers as befits a good man.
Now tell me, to whom ought we properly to send him for lessons in this virtue?
Or is it clear enough, from our argument just now, that he should go to these men who profess to be teachers of virtue and advertise themselves as the common teachers of the Greeks, and are ready to instruct anyone who chooses in return for fees charged on a fixed scale?
Anytus
To whom are you referring, Socrates?
Socrates
Surely you know as well as anyone; they are the men whom people call sophists.
Anytus
For heaven's sake hold your tongue, Socrates!
May no kinsman or friend of mine, whether of this city or another, be seized with such madness as to let himself be infected with the company of those men; for they are a manifest plague and corruption to those who frequent them.
Socrates
What is this, Anytus?
Of all the people who set up to understand how to do us good, do you mean to single out these as conveying not merely no benefit, such as the rest can give, but actually corruption to anyone placed in their hands?
And is it for doing this that they openly claim the payment of fees?
For my part I cannot bring myself to believe you;
for I know of one man, Protagoras, who amassed more money by his craft than Pheidias so famous for the noble works he produced or any ten other sculptors.
And yet how surprising that menders of old shoes and furbishers of clothes should not be able to go undetected thirty days if they should return the clothes or shoes in worse condition than they received them, and that such doings on their part would quickly starve them to death, while for more than forty years all Greece failed to notice that Protagoras was corrupting his classes and sending his pupils away in a worse state than when he took charge of them!
For I believe he died about seventy years old, forty of which he spent in the practice of his art; and he retains undiminished to this day the high reputation he has enjoyed all that time and not only Protagoras, but a multitude of others too: some who lived before him, and others still living.
Now are we to take it, according to you, that they wittingly deceived and corrupted the youth, or that they were themselves unconscious of it?
Are we to conclude those who are frequently termed the wisest of mankind to have been so demented as that?
Anytus
Demented, not they, Socrates: far rather the young men who pay them money, and still more the relations who let the young men have their way; and most of all the cities that allow them to enter, and do not expel them, whether such attempt be made by stranger or citizen.
Socrates
Tell me, Anytus, has any of the sophists wronged you?
What makes you so hard on them?
Anytus
No, heaven knows I have never in my life had dealings with any of them, nor would I let any of my people have to do with them either.
Socrates
Then you have absolutely no experience of those persons?
Anytus
And trust I never may.
Socrates
How then, my good sir, can you tell whether a thing has any good or evil in it, if you are quite without experience of it?
Anytus
Easily: the fact is, I know what these people are, whether I have experience of them or not.
Socrates
You are a wizard, perhaps, Anytus; for I really cannot see, from what you say yourself, how else you can know anything about them.
But we are not inquiring now who the teachers are whose lessons would make Meno wicked; let us grant, if you will, that they are the sophists: I only ask you to tell us, and do Meno a service as a friend of your family by letting him know, to whom in all this great city he should apply in order to become eminent in the virtue which I described just now.
Anytus
Why not tell him yourself?
Socrates
I did mention to him the men whom I supposed to be teachers of these things; but I find, from what you say, that I am quite off the track, and I daresay you are on it.
Now you take your turn, and tell him to whom of the Athenians he is to go.
Give us a name anyone you please.
Anytus
Why mention a particular one?
Any Athenian gentleman he comes across, without exception, will do him more good, if he will do as he is bid, than the sophists.
Socrates
And did those gentlemen grow spontaneously into what they are, and without learning from anybody are they able, nevertheless, to teach others what they did not learn themselves?
Anytus
I expect they must have learnt in their turn from the older generation, who were gentlemen: or does it not seem to you that we have had many good men in this city?
Socrates
Yes, I agree, Anytus; we have also many who are good at politics, and have had them in the past as well as now.
But I want to know whether they have proved good teachers besides of their own virtue:
that is the question with which our discussion is actually concerned;
not whether there are, or formerly have been, good men here amongst us or not, but whether virtue is teachable; this has been our problem all the time.
And our inquiry into this problem resolves itself into the question:
Did the good men of our own and of former times know how to transmit to another man the virtue in respect of which they were good, or is it something not to be transmitted or taken over from one human being to another?
That is the question I and Meno have been discussing all this time.
Well, just consider it in your own way of speaking: would you not say that Themistocles was a good man?
Anytus
I would, particularly so.
Socrates
And if any man ever was a teacher of his own virtue, he especially was a good teacher of his?
Anytus
In my opinion, yes, assuming that he wished to be so.
Socrates
But can you suppose he would not have wished that other people should become good, honorable men above all, I presume, his own son?
Or do you think he was jealous of him, and deliberately refused to impart the virtue of his own goodness to him?
Have you never heard how Themistocles had his son Cleophantus taught to be a good horseman?
Why, he could keep his balance standing upright on horseback, and hurl the javelin while so standing, and perform many other wonderful feats in which his father had had him trained, so as to make him skilled in all that could be learnt from good masters.
Surely you must have heard all this from your elders?
Anytus
I have.
Socrates
Then there could be no complaints of badness in his son's nature?
Anytus
I daresay not.
Socrates
But I ask you did you ever hear anybody, old or young, say that Cleophantus, son of Themistocles, had the same goodness and accomplishments as his father?
Anytus
Certainly not.
Socrates
And can we believe that his father chose to train his own son in those feats, and yet made him no better than his neighbors in his own particular accomplishments if virtue, as alleged, was to be taught?
Anytus
On my word, I think not.
Socrates
Well, there you have a fine teacher of virtue who, you admit, was one of the best men of past times.
Let us take another, Aristeides, son of Lysimachus: do you not admit that he was a good man?
Anytus
I do, absolutely, of course.
Socrates
Well, did he not train his son Lysimachus better than any other Athenian in all that masters could teach him?
And in the result, do you consider he has turned out better than anyone else?
You have been in his company, I know, and you see what he is like.
Or take another example the splendidly accomplished Pericles: he, as you are aware, brought up two sons, Paralus and Xanthippus.
Anytus
Yes.
Socrates
And, you know as well as I, he taught them to be the foremost horsemen of Athens, and trained them to excel in music and gymnastics and all else that comes under the head of the arts; and with all that, had he no desire to make them good men?
He wished to, I imagine, but presumably it is not a thing one can be taught.
And that you may not suppose it was only a few of the meanest sort of Athenians who failed in this matter, let me remind you that Thucydides' also brought up two sons, Melesias and Stephanus, and that besides giving them a good general education he made them the best wrestlers in Athens: one he placed with Xanthias, and the other with Eudorus masters who, I should think, had the name of being the best exponents of the art.
You remember them, do you not?
Anytus
Yes, by hearsay.
Socrates
Well, is it not obvious that this father would never have spent his money on having his children taught all those things, and then have omitted to teach them at no expense the others that would have made them good men, if virtue was to be taught?
Will you say that perhaps Thucydides was one of the meaner sort, and had no great number of friends among the Athenians and allies?
He, who was of a great house and had much influence in our city and all over Greece, so that if virtue were to be taught he would have found out the man who was likely to make his sons good, whether one of our own people or a foreigner, were he himself too busy owing to the cares of state!
Ah no, my dear Anytus, it looks as though virtue were not a teachable thing.
Anytus
Socrates, I consider you are too apt to speak ill of people.
I, for one, if you will take my advice, would warn you to be careful: in most cities it is probably easier to do people harm than good, and particularly in this one; I think you know that yourself.
Socrates
Meno, I think Anytus is angry, and I am not at all surprised: for he conceives, in the first place, that I am speaking ill of these gentlemen; and in the second place, he considers he is one of them himself.
Yet, should the day come when he knows what "speaking ill" means, his anger will cease; at present he does not know.
Now you must answer me: are there not good and honorable men among your people also?
Meno
Certainly.
Socrates
Well then, are they willing to put themselves forward as teachers of the young, and avow that they are teachers and that virtue is to be taught?
Meno
No, no, Socrates, I assure you: sometimes you may hear them refer to it as teachable, but sometimes as not.
Socrates
Then are we to call those persons teachers of this thing, when they do not even agree on that great question?
Meno
I should say not, Socrates.
Socrates
Well, and what of the sophists?
Do you consider these, its only professors, to be teachers of virtue?
Meno
That is a point, Socrates, for which I admire Gorgias:
you will never hear him promising this, and he ridicules the others when he hears them promise it.
Skill in speaking is what he takes it to be their business to produce.
Socrates
Then you do not think the sophists are teachers of virtue?
Meno
I cannot say, Socrates.
I am in the same plight as the rest of the world: sometimes I think that they are, sometimes that they are not.
Socrates
And are you aware that not only you and other political folk are in two minds as to whether virtue is to be taught, but Theognis the poet also says, you remember, the very same thing?
Meno
In which part of his poems?
Socrates
In those elegiac lines where he says
Meno
He does, evidently.
Meno
Apparently.
Socrates
Well, can you name any other subject in which the professing teachers are not only refused recognition as teachers of others, but regarded as not even understanding it themselves, and indeed as inferior in the very quality of which they claim to be teachers; while those who are themselves recognized as men of worth and honor say at one time that it is teachable, and at another that it is not?
When people are so confused about this or that matter, can you say they are teachers in any proper sense of the word?
Meno
No, indeed, I cannot.
Socrates
Well, if neither the sophists nor the men who are themselves good and honorable are teachers of the subject, clearly no others can be?
Meno
I agree.
Socrates
And if there are no teachers, there can be no disciples either?
Meno
I think that statement is true.
Socrates
And we have admitted that a thing of which there are neither teachers nor disciples cannot be taught?
Meno
We have agreed.
Socrates
So nowhere are any teachers of virtue to be found?
Meno
That is so.
Socrates
And if no teachers, then no disciples?
Meno
So it appears.
Socrates
Hence virtue cannot be taught?
Meno
It seems likely, if our investigation is correct.
And that makes me wonder, I must say, Socrates, whether perhaps there are no good men at all, or by what possible sort of process good people can come to exist?
Socrates
I fear, Meno, you and I are but poor creatures, and Gorgias has been as faulty an educator of you as Prodicus of me.
So our first duty is to look to ourselves, and try to find somebody who will have some means or other of making us better.
I say this with special reference to our recent inquiry, in which I see that we absurdly failed to note that it is not only through the guidance of knowledge that human conduct is right and good; and it is probably owing to this that we fail to perceive by what means good men can be produced.
Meno
To what are you alluding, Socrates?
Socrates
I mean that good men must be useful: we were right, were we not, in admitting that this must needs be so?
Meno
Yes.
Socrates
And in thinking that they will be useful if they give us right guidance in conduct: here also, I suppose, our admission was correct?
Meno
Yes.
Socrates
But our assertion that it is impossible to give right guidance unless one has knowledge looks very like a mistake.
Meno
What do you mean by that?
Socrates
I will tell you.
If a man knew the way to Larisa, or any other place you please, and walked there and led others, would he not give right and good guidance?
Meno
Certainly.
Socrates
Well, and a person who had a right opinion as to which was the way, but had never been there and did not really know, might give right guidance, might he not?
Meno
Certainly.
Socrates
And so long, I presume, as he has right opinion about that which the other man really knows, he will be just as good a guide if he thinks the truth instead of knowing it as the man who has the knowledge.
Meno
Just as good.
Socrates
Hence true opinion is as good a guide to rightness of action as knowledge; and this is a point we omitted just now in our consideration of the nature of virtue, when we stated that knowledge is the only guide of right action; whereas we find there is also true opinion.
Meno
So it seems.
Socrates
Then right opinion is just as useful as knowledge.
Meno
With this difference, Socrates, that he who has knowledge will always hit on the right way, whereas he who has right opinion will sometimes do so, but sometimes not.
Socrates
How do you mean?
Will not he who always has right opinion be always right, so long as he opines rightly?
Meno
It appears to me that he must; and therefore I wonder, Socrates, this being the case, that knowledge should ever be more prized than right opinion, and why they should be two distinct and separate things.
Socrates
Well, do you know why it is that you wonder, or shall I tell you?
Meno
Please tell me.
Socrates
It is because you have not observed with attention the images of Daedalus.
But perhaps there are none in your country.
Meno
What is the point of your remark?
Socrates
That if they are not fastened up they play truant and run away; but, if fastened, they stay where they are.
Meno
Well, what of that?
Socrates
To possess one of his works which is let loose does not count for much in value; it will not stay with you any more than a runaway slave: but when fastened up it is worth a great deal,
for his productions are very fine things
And to what am I referring in all this?
To true opinion.
For these, so long as they stay with us, are a fine possession, and effect all that is good; but they do not care to stay for long, and run away out of the human soul, and thus are of no great value until one makes them fast with causal reasoning.
And this process, friend Meno, is recollection, as in our previous talk we have agreed.
But when once they are fastened, in the first place they turn into knowledge, and in the second, are abiding.
And this is why knowledge is more prized than right opinion: the one transcends the other by its trammels.
Meno
Upon my word, Socrates, it seems to be very much as you say.
Socrates
And indeed I too speak as one who does not know but only conjectures: yet that there is a difference between right opinion and knowledge is not at all a conjecture with me but something I would particularly assert that I knew: there are not many things of which I would say that, but this one, at any rate, I will include among those that I know.
Meno
Yes, and you are right, Socrates, in so saying.
Socrates
Well, then, am I not right also in saying that true opinion leading the way renders the effect of each action as good as knowledge does?
Meno
There again, Socrates, I think you speak the truth.
Socrates
So that right opinion will be no whit inferior to knowledge in worth or usefulness as regards our actions, nor will the man who has right opinion be inferior to him who has knowledge.
Meno
That is so.
Socrates
And you know that the good man has been admitted by us to be useful.
Meno
Yes.
Socrates
Since then it is not only because of knowledge that men will be good and useful to their country, where such men are to be found, but also on account of right opinion; and since neither of these two things knowledge and true opinion is a natural property of mankind, being acquired or do you think that either of them is natural?
Meno
Not I.
Socrates
Then if they are not natural, good people cannot be good by nature either.
Meno
Of course not.
Socrates
And since they are not an effect of nature, we next considered whether virtue can be taught.
Meno
Yes.
Socrates
And we thought it teachable if virtue is wisdom?
Meno
Yes.
Socrates
And if teachable, it must be wisdom?
Meno
Certainly.
Socrates
And if there were teachers, it could be taught, but if there were none, it could not?
Meno
Quite so.
Socrates
But surely we acknowledged that it had no teachers?
Meno
That is true.
Socrates
Then we acknowledged it neither was taught nor was wisdom?
Meno
Certainly.
Socrates
But yet we admitted it was a good?
Meno
Yes.
Socrates
And that which guides rightly is useful and good?
Meno
Certainly.
Socrates
And that there are only two things true opinion and knowledge that guide rightly and a man guides rightly if he have these; for things that come about by chance do not occur through human guidance; but where a man is a guide to what is right we find these two things true opinion and knowledge.
Meno
I agree.
Socrates
Well now, since virtue is not taught, we no longer take it to be knowledge?
Meno
Apparently not.
Socrates
So of two good and useful things one has been rejected: knowledge cannot be our guide in political conduct.
Meno
I think not.
Socrates
Therefore it was not by any wisdom, nor because they were wise, that the sort of men we spoke of controlled their states Themistocles and the rest of them, to whom our friend Anytus was referring a moment ago.
For this reason it was that they were unable to make others like unto themselves because their qualities were not an effect of knowledge.
Meno
The case is probably as you say, Socrates.
Socrates
And if not by knowledge, as the only alternative it must have been by good opinion.
This is the means which statesmen employ for their direction of states, and they have nothing more to do with wisdom than soothsayers and diviners; for these people utter many a true thing when inspired, but have no knowledge of anything they say.
Meno
I daresay that is so.
Socrates
And may we, Meno, rightly call those men divine who, having no understanding, yet succeed in many a great deed and word?
Meno
Certainly.
Socrates
Then we shall be right in calling those divine of whom we spoke just now as soothsayers and prophets and all of the poetic turn; and especially we can say of the statesmen that they are divine and enraptured, as being inspired and possessed of God when they succeed in speaking many great things, while knowing nought of what they say.
Meno
Certainly.
Socrates
And the women too, I presume, Meno, call good men divine; and the Spartans, when they eulogize a good man, say "He is a divine person."
Meno
And to all appearance, Socrates, they are right;
though perhaps our friend Anytus may be annoyed at your statement.
Socrates
For my part, I care not.
As for him, Meno, we will converse with him some other time.
At the moment, if through all this discussion our queries and statements have been correct, virtue is found to be neither natural nor taught, but is imparted to us by a divine dispensation without understanding in those who receive it, unless there should be somebody among the statesmen capable of making a statesman of another.
And if there should be any such, he might fairly be said to be among the living what Homer says Teiresias was among the dead "He alone has comprehension; the rest are flitting shades."
In the same way he on earth, in respect of virtue, will be a real substance among shadows.
Meno
I think you put it excellently, Socrates.
Socrates
Then the result of our reasoning, Meno, is found to be that virtue comes to us by a divine dispensation, when it does come.
But the certainty of this we shall only know when, before asking in what way virtue comes to mankind, we set about inquiring what virtue is, in and by itself.
It is time now for me to go my way, but do you persuade our friend Anytus of that whereof you are now yourself persuaded, so as to put him in a gentler mood; for if you can persuade him, you will do a good turn to the people of Athens also.
Apology of Socrates
How you, men of Athens, have been affected by my accusers, I do not know;
but I, for my part, almost forgot my own identity, so persuasively did they talk;
and yet there is hardly a word of truth in what they have said.
But I was most amazed by one of the many lies that they told
when they said that you must be on your guard not to be deceived by me, because I was a clever speaker.
For I thought it the most shameless part of their conduct that they are not ashamed because they will immediately be convicted by me of falsehood by the evidence of fact, when I show myself to be not in the least a clever speaker, unless indeed they call him a clever speaker who speaks the truth; for if this is what they mean, I would agree that I am an orator not after their fashion.
Now they, as I say, have said little or nothing true;
but you shall hear from me nothing but the truth.
Not, however, men of Athens, speeches finely tricked out with words and phrases,
as theirs are, nor carefully arranged, but you will hear things said at random with the words that happen to occur to me.
For I trust that what I say is just; and let none of you expect anything else.
For surely it would not be fitting for one of my age to come before you like a youngster making up speeches.
And, men of Athens, I urgently beg and beseech you if you hear me making my defence with the same words with which I have been accustomed to speak both in the market place at the bankers tables, where many of you have heard me, and elsewhere, not to be surprised or to make a disturbance on this account.
For the fact is that this is the first time I have come before the court, although I am seventy years old;
I am therefore an utter foreigner to the manner of speech here.
Hence, just as you would, of course, if I were really a foreigner, pardon me if I spoke in that dialect and that manner in which I had been brought up, so now I make this request of you, a fair one, as it seems to me, that you disregard the manner of my speech for perhaps it might be worse and perhaps better and observe and pay attention merely to this, whether what I say is just or not; for that is the virtue of a judge, and an orator's virtue is to speak the truth.
First then it is right for me to defend myself against the first false accusations brought against me, men of Athens, and the first accusers, and then against the later accusations and the later accusers.
For many accusers have risen up against me before you, who have been speaking for a long time, many years already, and saying nothing true;
and I fear them more than Anytus and the rest, though these also are dangerous; but those others are more dangerous, gentlemen, who gained your belief, since they got hold of most of you in childhood, and accused me without any truth, saying, "There is a certain Socrates, a wise man, a ponderer over the things in the air and one who has investigated the things beneath the earth and who makes the weaker argument the stronger."
These, men of Athens, who have spread abroad this report, are my dangerous enemies.
For those who hear them think that men who investigate these matters do not even believe in gods.
Besides, these accusers are many and have been making their accusations already for a long time, and moreover they spoke to you at an age at which you would believe them most readily (some of you in youth, most of you in childhood), and the case they prosecuted went utterly by default, since nobody appeared in defence.
But the most unreasonable thing of all is this, that it is not even possible to know and speak their names, except when one of them happens to be a writer of comedies.
And all those who persuaded you by means of envy and slander and some also persuaded others because they had been themselves persuaded all these are most difficult to cope with; for it is not even possible to call any of them up here and cross-question him, but I am compelled in making my defence to fight, as it were, absolutely with shadows and to cross-question when nobody answers.
Be kind enough, then, to bear in mind, as I say, that there are two classes of my accusers one those who have just brought their accusation, the other those who, as I was just saying, brought it long ago, and consider that I must defend myself first against the latter; for you heard them making their charges first and with much greater force than these who made them later.
Well, then, I must make a defence, men of Athens, and must try in so short a time to remove from you this prejudice which you have been for so long a time acquiring.
Now I wish that this might turn out so, if it is better for you and for me, and that I might succeed with my defence; but I think it is difficult, and I am not at all deceived about its nature.
But nevertheless, let this be as is pleasing to God, the law must be obeyed and I must make a defence.
Now let us take up from the beginning the question, what the accusation is from which the false prejudice against me has arisen, in which Meletus trusted when he brought this suit against me.
What did those who aroused the prejudice say to arouse it?
I must, as it were, read their sworn statement as if they were plaintiffs:
"Socrates is a criminal and a busybody, investigating the things beneath the earth and in the heavens and making the weaker argument stronger and teaching others these same things."
Something of that sort it is.
For you yourselves saw these things in Aristophanes' comedy, a Socrates being carried about there, proclaiming that he was treading on air and uttering a vast deal of other nonsense, about which I know nothing, either much or little.
And I say this, not to cast dishonor upon such knowledge, if anyone is wise about such matters (may I never have to defend myself against Meletus on so great a charge as that!), but I, men of Athens, have nothing to do with these things.
And I offer as witnesses most of yourselves, and I ask you to inform one another and to tell, all those of you who ever heard me conversing and there are many such among you now tell, if anyone ever heard me talking much or little about such matters.
And from this you will perceive that such are also the other things that the multitude say about me.
But in fact none of these things are true, and if you have heard from anyone that I undertake to teach people and that I make money by it, that is not true either.
Although this also seems to me to be a fine thing, if one might be able to teach people, as Gorgias of Leontini and Prodicus of Ceos and Hippias of Elis are.
For each of these men, gentlemen, is able to go into any one of the cities and persuade the young men, who can associate for nothing with whomsoever they wish among their own fellow citizens, to give up the association with those men and to associate with them and pay them money and be grateful besides.
And there is also another wise man here, a Parian, who I learned was in town;
for I happened to meet a man who has spent more on sophists than all the rest, Callias, the son of Hipponicus; so I asked him for he has two sons "Callias," said I, "if your two sons had happened to be two colts or two calves, we should be able to get and hire for them an overseer who would make them excellent in the kind of excellence proper to them; and he would be a horse-trainer or a husbandman; but now, since they are two human beings, whom have you in mind to get as overseer?
Who has knowledge of that kind of excellence, that of a man and a citizen?
For I think you have looked into the matter, because you have the sons.
Is there anyone," said I, "or not?"
"Certainly," said he.
"Who," said I, "and where from, and what is his price for his teaching?"
"Evenus," he said, "Socrates, from Paros, five minae."
And I called Evenus blessed, if he really had this art and taught so reasonably.
I myself should be vain and put on airs, if I understood these things; but I do not understand them, men of Athens.
Now perhaps someone might rejoin: "But, Socrates, what is the trouble about you?
Whence have these prejudices against you arisen?
For certainly this great report and talk has not arisen while you were doing nothing more out of the way than the rest, unless you were doing something other than most people;
so tell us what it is, that we may not act unadvisedly in your case."
The man who says this seems to me to be right, and I will try to show you what it is that has brought about my reputation and aroused the prejudice against me.
So listen.
And perhaps I shall seem to some of you to be joking; be assured, however, I shall speak perfect truth to you.
The fact is, men of Athens, that I have acquired this reputation on account of nothing else than a sort of wisdom.
What kind of wisdom is this?
Just that which is perhaps human wisdom.
For perhaps I really am wise in this wisdom;
and these men, perhaps, of whom I was just speaking, might be wise in some wisdom greater than human, or I don't know what to say; for I do not understand it, and whoever says I do, is lying and speaking to arouse prejudice against me.
And, men of Athens, do not interrupt me with noise, even if I seem to you to be boasting; for the word which I speak is not mine, but the speaker to whom I shall refer it is a person of weight.
For of my wisdom if it is wisdom at all and of its nature, I will offer you the god of Delphi as a witness.
You know Chaerephon, I fancy.
He was my comrade from a youth and the comrade of your democratic party, and shared in the recent exile and came back with you.
And you know the kind of man Chaerephon was, how impetuous in whatever he undertook.
Well, once he went to Delphi and made so bold as to ask the oracle this question; and, gentlemen, don't make a disturbance at what I say; for he asked if there were anyone wiser than I.
Now the Pythia replied that there was no one wiser.
And about these things his brother here will bear you witness, since he is dead.
But see why I say these things; for I am going to tell you whence the prejudice against me has arisen.
For when I heard this, I thought to myself: "What in the world does the god mean, and what riddle is he propounding?
For I am conscious that I am not wise either much or little.
What then does he mean by declaring that I am the wisest?
He certainly cannot be lying, for that is not possible for him."
And for a long time I was at a loss as to what he meant; then with great reluctance I proceeded to investigate him somewhat as follows.
I went to one of those who had a reputation for wisdom, thinking that there, if anywhere, I should prove the utterance wrong and should show the oracle "This man is wiser than I, but you said I was wisest."
So examining this man for I need not call him by name, but it was one of the public men with regard to whom I had this kind of experience, men of Athens and conversing with him, this man seemed to me to seem to be wise to many other people and especially to himself, but not to be so; and then I tried to show him that he thought he was wise, but was not.
As a result, I became hateful to him and to many of those present;
and so, as I went away, I thought to myself, "I am wiser than this man; for neither of us really knows anything fine and good, but this man thinks he knows something when he does not, whereas I, as I do not know anything, do not think I do either.
I seem, then, in just this little thing to be wiser than this man at any rate, that what I do not know I do not think I know either."
From him I went to another of those who were reputed to be wiser than he, and these same things seemed to me to be true; and there I became hateful both to him and to many others.
After this then I went on from one to another, perceiving that I was hated, and grieving and fearing, but nevertheless I thought I must consider the god's business of the highest importance.
So I had to go, investigating the meaning of the oracle, to all those who were reputed to know anything.
And by the Dog, men of Athens for I must speak the truth to you this, I do declare, was my experience:
those who had the most reputation seemed to me to be almost the most deficient, as I investigated at the god's behest, and others who were of less repute seemed to be superior men in the matter of being sensible.
For after the public men I went to the poets, those of tragedies, and those of dithyrambs, and the rest, thinking that there I should prove by actual test that I was less learned than they.
So, taking up the poems of theirs that seemed to me to have been most carefully elaborated by them, I asked them what they meant, that I might at the same time learn something from them.
Now I am ashamed to tell you the truth, gentlemen; but still it must be told.
For there was hardly a man present, one might say, who would not speak better than they about the poems they themselves had composed.
So again in the case of the poets also I presently recognized this, that what they composed they composed not by wisdom, but by nature and because they were inspired, like the prophets and givers of oracles; for these also say many fine things, but know none of the things they say; it was evident to me that the poets too had experienced something of this same sort.
And at the same time I perceived that they, on account of their poetry, thought that they were the wisest of men in other things as well, in which they were not.
So I went away from them also thinking that I was superior to them in the same thing in which I excelled the public men.
Finally then I went to the hand-workers.
For I was conscious that I knew practically nothing, but I knew I should find that they knew many fine things.
And in this I was not deceived; they did know what I did not, and in this way they were wiser than I.
But, men of Athens, the good artisans also seemed to me to have the same failing as the poets; because of practicing his art well, each one thought he was very wise in the other most important matters, and this folly of theirs obscured that wisdom, so that I asked myself in behalf of the oracle whether I should prefer to be as I am, neither wise in their wisdom nor foolish in their folly, or to be in both respects as they are.
I replied then to myself and to the oracle that it was better for me to be as I am.
Now from this investigation, men of Athens, many enmities have arisen against me, and such as are most harsh and grievous, so that many prejudices have resulted from them and I am called a wise man.
For on each occasion those who are present think I am wise in the matters in which I confute someone else;
but the fact is, gentlemen, it is likely that the god is really wise and by his oracle means this: "Human wisdom is of little or no value."
And it appears that he does not really say this of Socrates, but merely uses my name, and makes me an example, as if he were to say: "This one of you, O human beings, is wisest, who, like Socrates, recognizes that he is in truth of no account in respect to wisdom."
Therefore I am still even now going about and searching and investigating at the god's behest anyone, whether citizen or foreigner, who I think is wise; and when he does not seem so to me, I give aid to the god and show that he is not wise.
And by reason of this occupation I have no leisure to attend to any of the affairs of the state worth mentioning, or of my own, but am in vast poverty on account of my service to the god.
And in addition to these things, the young men who have the most leisure, the sons of the richest men, accompany me of their own accord, find pleasure in hearing people being examined, and often imitate me themselves, and then they undertake to examine others; and then, I fancy, they find a great plenty of people who think they know something, but know little or nothing.
As a result, therefore, those who are examined by them are angry with me, instead of being angry with themselves, and say that "Socrates is a most abominable person and is corrupting the youth."
And when anyone asks them "by doing or teaching what?"
they have nothing to say, but they do not know, and that they may not seem to be at a loss they say these things that are handy to say against all the philosophers, "the things in the air and the things beneath the earth" and "not to believe in the gods" and "to make the weaker argument the stronger."
For they would not, I fancy, care to say the truth, that it is being made very clear that they pretend to know, but know nothing.
Since, then, they are jealous of their honor and energetic and numerous and speak concertedly and persuasively about me, they have filled your ears both long ago and now with vehement slanders.
From among them Meletus attacked me, and Anytus and Lycon, Meletus angered on account of the poets, and Anytus on account of the artisans and the public men, and Lycon on account of the orators; so that, as I said in the beginning, I should be surprised if I were able to remove this prejudice from you in so short a time when it has grown so great.
There you have the truth, men of Athens, and I speak without hiding anything from you, great or small or prevaricating.
And yet I know pretty well that I am making myself hated by just that conduct; which is also a proof that I am speaking the truth and that this is the prejudice against me and these are its causes.
And whether you investigate this now or hereafter, you will find that it is so.
Now so far as the accusations are concerned which my first accusers made against me, this is a sufficient defence before you; but against Meletus, the good and patriotic, as he says, and the later ones, I will try to defend myself next.
So once more, as if these were another set of accusers, let us take up in turn their sworn statement.
It is about as follows: it states that Socrates is a wrongdoer because he corrupts the youth and does not believe in the gods the state believes in, but in other new spiritual beings.
Such is the accusation.
But let us examine each point of this accusation.
He says I am a wrongdoer because I corrupt the youth.
But I, men of Athens, say Meletus is a wrongdoer, because he jokes in earnest, lightly involving people in a lawsuit, pretending to be zealous and concerned about things or which he never cared at all.
And that this is so I will try to make plain to you also.
Come here, Meletus, tell me: don't you consider it of great importance that the youth be as good as possible?
"I do."
Come now, tell these gentlemen who makes them better?
For it is evident that you know, since you care about it.
For you have found the one who corrupts them, as you say, and you bring me before these gentlemen and accuse me; and now, come, tell who makes them better and inform them who he is.
Do you see, Meletus, that you are silent and cannot tell?
And yet does it not seem to you disgraceful and a sufficient proof of what I say, that you have never cared about it?
But tell, my good man, who makes them better?
"The laws."
But that is not what I ask, most excellent one, but what man, who knows in the first place just this very thing, the laws.
"These men, Socrates, the judges."
What are you saying, Meletus?
Are these gentlemen able to instruct the youth, and do they make them better?
"Certainly."
All, or some of them and others not?
"All."
Well said, by Hera, and this is a great plenty of helpers you speak of.
But how about this?
Do these listeners make them better, or not?
"These also."
And how about the senators?
"The senators also."
But, Meletus, those in the assembly, the assemblymen, don't corrupt the youth, do they?
or do they also all make them better?
"They also."
All the Athenians, then, as it seems, make them excellent, except myself, and I alone corrupt them.
Is this what you mean?
"Very decidedly, that is what I mean."
You have condemned me to great unhappiness!
But answer me;
does it seem to you to be so in the case of horses,
that those who make them better are all mankind, and he who injures them some one person?
Or, quite the opposite of this, that he who is able to make them better is some one person, or very few, the horse-trainers, whereas most people, if they have to do with and use horses, injure them?
Is it not so, Meletus, both in the case of horses and in that of all other animals?
Certainly it is, whether you and Anytus deny it or agree; for it would be a great state of blessedness in the case of the youth if one alone corrupts them, and the others do them good.
But, Meletus, you show clearly enough that you never thought about the youth, and you exhibit plainly your own carelessness, that you have not cared at all for the things about which you hale me into court.
But besides, tell us, for heaven's sake, Meletus, is it better to live among good citizens, or bad?
My friend, answer; for I am not asking anything hard.
Do not the bad do some evil to those who are with them at any time and the good some good?
"Certainly."
Is there then anyone who prefers to be injured by his associates rather than benefited?
Answer, my good man; for the law orders you to answer.
Is there anyone who prefers to be injured?
"Of course not."
Come then, do you hale me in here on the ground that I am corrupting the youth and making them worse voluntarily or involuntarily?
"Voluntarily I say."
What then, Meletus?
Are you at your age so much wiser than I at my age, that you have recognized that the evil always do some evil to those nearest them, and the good some good; whereas I have reached such a depth of ignorance that I do not even know this, that if I make anyone of my associates bad I am in danger of getting some harm from him, so that I do this great evil voluntarily, as you say?
I don't believe this, Meletus, nor do I think anyone else in the world does!
but either I do not corrupt them, or if I corrupt them, I do it involuntarily, so that you are lying in both events.
But if I corrupt them involuntarily, for such involuntary errors the law is not to hale people into court, but to take them and instruct and admonish them in private.
For it is clear that if I am told about it, I shall stop doing that which I do involuntarily.
But you avoided associating with me and instructing me, and were unwilling to do so, but you hale me in here, where it is the law to hale in those who need punishment, not instruction.
But enough of this, for, men of Athens, this is clear, as I said, that Meletus never cared much or little for these things.
But nevertheless, tell us, how do you say, Meletus, that I corrupt the youth?
Or is it evident, according to the indictment you brought, that it is by teaching them not to believe in the gods the state believes in, but in other new spiritual beings?
Do you not say that it is by teaching this that I corrupt them?
"Very decidedly that is what I say."
Then, Meletus, for the sake of these very gods about whom our speech now is, speak still more clearly both to me and to these gentlemen.
For I am unable to understand whether you say that I teach that there are some gods, and myself then believe that there are some gods, and am not altogether godless and am not a wrongdoer in that way, that these, however, are not the gods whom the state believes in, but others, and this is what you accuse me for, that I believe in others; or you say that I do not myself believe in gods at all and that I teach this unbelief to other people.
"That is what I say, that you do not believe in gods at all."
You amaze me, Meletus!
Why do you say this?
Do I not even believe that the sun or yet the moon are gods, as the rest of mankind do?
"No, by Zeus, judges, since he says that the sun is a stone and the moon earth."
Do you think you are accusing Anaxagoras, my dear Meletus,
and do you so despise these gentlemen and think they are so unversed in letters as not to know, that the books of Anaxagoras the Clazomenian are full of such utterances?
And forsooth the youth learn these doctrines from me, which they can buy sometimes (if the price is high) for a drachma in the orchestra and laugh at Socrates, if he pretends they are his own, especially when they are so absurd!
But for heaven's sake, do you think this of me,
that I do not believe there is any god?
"No, by Zeus, you don't, not in the least."
You cannot be believed, Meletus, not even, as it seems to me, by yourself.
For this man appears to me, men of Athens, to be very violent and unrestrained, and actually to have brought this indictment in a spirit of violence and unrestraint and rashness.
For he seems, as it were, by composing a puzzle to be making a test: "Will Socrates, the wise man, recognize that I am joking and contradicting myself, or shall I deceive him and the others who hear me?"
For he appears to me to contradict himself in his speech, as if he were to say, "Socrates is a wrongdoer, because he does not believe in gods, but does believe in gods."
And yet this is the conduct of a jester.
Join me, then, gentlemen, in examining how he appears to me to say this; and do you, Meletus, answer;
and you, gentlemen, as I asked you in the beginning, please bear in mind not to make a disturbance if I conduct my argument in my accustomed manner.
Is there any human being who believes that there are things pertaining to human beings, but no human beings?
Let him answer, gentlemen, and not make a disturbance in one way or another.
Is there anyone who does not believe in horses, but does believe in things pertaining to horses?
or who does not believe that flute-players exist, but that things pertaining to flute-players do?
There is not, best of men; if you do not wish to answer, I say it to you and these others here.
But answer at least the next question.
Is there anyone who believes spiritual things exist, but does not believe in spirits?
"There is not."
Thank you for replying reluctantly when forced by these gentlemen.
Then you say that I believe in spiritual beings, whether new or old, and teach that belief; but then I believe in spiritual beings at any rate, according to your statement, and you swore to that in your indictment.
But if I believe in spiritual beings, it is quite inevitable that I believe also in spirits; is it not so?
It is; for I assume that you agree, since you do not answer.
But do we not think the spirits are gods or children of gods?
Yes, or no?
"Certainly."
Then if I believe in spirits, as you say, if spirits are a kind of gods, that would be the puzzle and joke which I say you are uttering in saying that I, while I do not believe in gods, do believe In gods again, since I believe in spirits; but if, on the other hand, spirits are a kind of bastard children of gods, by nymphs or by any others, whoever their mothers are said to be, what man would believe that there are children of gods, but no gods?
It would be just as absurd as if one were to believe that there are children of horses and asses, namely mules, but no horses and asses.
But, Meletus, you certainly must have brought this suit either to make a test of us or because you were loss as to what true wrongdoing you could accuse me of; but there is no way for you to persuade any man who has even a little sense that it is possible for the same person to believe in spiritual and divine existences and again for the same person not to believe in spirits or gods or heroes.
Well then, men of Athens, that I am not a wrongdoer according to Meletus's indictment, seems to me not to need much of a defence, but what has been said is enough.
But you may be assured that what I said before is true, that great hatred has arisen against me and in the minds of many persons.
And this it is which will cause my condemnation, if it is to cause it, not Meletus or Anytus, but the prejudice and dislike of the many.
This has condemned many other good men, and I think will do so; and there is no danger that it will stop with me.
But perhaps someone might say: "Are you then not ashamed, Socrates, of having followed such a pursuit, that you are now in danger of being put to death as a result?"
But I should make to him a just reply: "You do not speak well, Sir, if you think a man in whom there is even a little merit ought to consider danger of life or death, and not rather regard this only, when he does things, whether the things he does are right or wrong and the acts of a good or a bad man.
For according to your argument all the demigods would be bad who died at Troy, including the son of Thetis, who so despised danger, in comparison with enduring any disgrace, that when his mother (and she was a goddess) said to him, as he was eager to slay Hector, something like this, I believe,
"My son, if you avenge the death of your friend Patroclus and kill Hector, you yourself shall die;
for straightway, after Hector, is death appointed unto you;
"he, when he heard this, made light of death and danger, and feared much more to live as a coward and not to avenge his friends, and said, "Straightway may I die, after doing vengeance upon the wrongdoer, that I may not stay here, jeered at beside the curved ships, a burden of the earth.".
Do you think he considered death and danger?
For thus it is, men of Athens, in truth; wherever a man stations himself, thinking it is best to be there, or is stationed by his commander, there he must, as it seems to me, remain and run his risks, considering neither death nor any other thing more than disgrace.
So I should have done a terrible thing, if, when the commanders whom you chose to command me stationed me, both at Potidaea and at Amphipolis and at Delium, I remained where they stationed me, like anybody else, and ran the risk of death, but when the god gave me a station, as I believed and understood, with orders to spend my life in philosophy and in examining myself and others, then I were to desert my post through fear of death or anything else whatsoever.
It would be a terrible thing, and truly one might then justly hale me into court, on the charge that I do not believe that there are gods, since I disobey the oracle and fear death and think I am wise when I am not.
For to fear death, gentlemen, is nothing else than to think one is wise when one is not; for it is thinking one knows what one does not know.
For no one knows whether death be not even the greatest of all blessings to man, but they fear it as if they knew that it is the greatest of evils.
And is not this the most reprehensible form of ignorance, that of thinking one knows what one does not know?
Perhaps, gentlemen, in this matter also I differ from other men in this way, and if I were to say that I am wiser in anything, it would be in this, that not knowing very much about the other world, I do not think I know.
But I do know that it is evil and disgraceful to do wrong and to disobey him who is better than I, whether he be god or man.
So I shall never fear or avoid those things concerning which I do not know whether they are good or bad rather than those which I know are bad.
And therefore, even if you acquit me now and are not convinced by Anytus, who said that either I ought not to have been brought to trial at all, or since was brought to trial, I must certainly be put to death, adding that if I were acquitted your sons would all be utterly ruined by practicing what Socrates teaches if you should say to me in reply to this:
"Socrates, this time we will not do as Anytus says, but we will let you go, on this condition, however, that you no longer spend your time in this investigation or in philosophy, and if you are caught doing so again you shall die";
if you should let me go on this condition which I have mentioned, I should say to you, "Men of Athens, I respect and love you, but I shall obey the god rather than you, and while I live and am able to continue, I shall never give up philosophy or stop exhorting you and pointing out the truth to any one of you whom I may meet, saying in my accustomed way:
"Most excellent man, are you who are a citizen of Athens, the greatest of cities and the most famous for wisdom and power, not ashamed to care for the acquisition of wealth and for reputation and honor, when you neither care nor take thought for wisdom and truth and the perfection of your soul?"
And if any of you argues the point, and says he does care, I shall not let him go at once, nor shall I go away, but I shall question and examine and cross-examine him, and if I find that he does not possess virtue, but says he does, I shall rebuke him for scorning the things that are of most importance and caring more for what is of less worth.
This I shall do to whomever I meet, young and old, foreigner and citizen, but most to the citizens, inasmuch as you are more nearly related to me.
For know that the god commands me to do this, and I believe that no greater good ever came to pass in the city than my service to the god.
For I go about doing nothing else than urging you, young and old, not to care for your persons or your property more than for the perfection of your souls, or even so much; and I tell you that virtue does not come from money, but from virtue comes money and all other good things to man, both to the individual and to the state.
If by saying these things I corrupt the youth, these things must be injurious; but if anyone asserts that I say other things than these, he says what is untrue.
Therefore I say to you, men of Athens, either do as Anytus tells you, or not, and either acquit me, or not, knowing that I shall not change my conduct even if I am to die many times over.
Do not make a disturbance, men of Athens; continue to do what I asked of you, not to interrupt my speech by disturbances, but to hear me; and I believe you will profit by hearing.
Now I am going to say some things to you at which you will perhaps cry out;
but do not do so by any means.
For know that if you kill me, I being such a man as I say I am, you will not injure me so much as yourselves;
for neither Meletus nor Anytus could injure me;
that would be impossible,
for I believe it is not God's will that a better man be injured by a worse.
He might, however, perhaps kill me or banish me or disfranchise me; and perhaps he thinks he would thus inflict great injuries upon me, and others may think so, but I do not; I think he does himself a much greater injury by doing what he is doing now killing a man unjustly.
And so, men of Athens, I am now making my defence not for my own sake, as one might imagine, but far more for yours, that you may not by condemning me err in your treatment of the gift the God gave you.
For if you put me to death, you will not easily find another, who, to use a rather absurd figure, attaches himself to the city as a gadfly to a horse, which, though large and well bred, is sluggish on account of his size and needs to be aroused by stinging.
I think the god fastened me upon the city in some such capacity, and I go about arousing, and urging and reproaching each one of you, constantly alighting upon you everywhere the whole day long.
Such another is not likely to come to you, gentlemen; but if you take my advice, you will spare me.
But you, perhaps, might be angry, like people awakened from a nap, and might slap me, as Anytus advises, and easily kill me; then you would pass the rest of your lives in slumber, unless God, in his care for you, should send someone else to sting you.
And that I am, as I say, a kind of gift from the god, you might understand from this; for I have neglected all my own affairs and have been enduring the neglect of my concerns all these years, but I am always busy in your interest, coming to each one of you individually like a father or an elder brother and urging you to care for virtue; now that is not like human conduct.
If I derived any profit from this and received pay for these exhortations, there would be some sense in it; but now you yourselves see that my accusers, though they accuse me of everything else in such a shameless way, have not been able to work themselves up to such a pitch of shamelessness as to produce a witness to testify that I ever exacted or asked pay of anyone.
For I think I have a sufficient witness that I speak the truth, namely, my poverty.
Perhaps it may seem strange that I go about and interfere in other people's affairs to give this advice in private, but do not venture to come before your assembly and advise the state.
But the reason for this, as you have heard me say at many times and places, is that something divine and spiritual comes to me, the very thing which Meletus ridiculed in his indictment.
I have had this from my childhood; it is a sort of voice that comes to me, and when it comes it always holds me back from what I am thinking of doing, but never urges me forward.
This it is which opposes my engaging in politics.
And I think this opposition is a very good thing; for you may be quite sure, men of Athens, that if I had undertaken to go into politics, I should have been put to death long ago and should have done no good to you or to myself.
And do not be angry with me for speaking the truth;
the fact is that no man will save his life who nobly opposes you or any other populace and prevents many unjust and illegal things from happening in the state.
A man who really fights for the right, if he is to preserve his life for even a little while, must be a private citizen, not a public man.
I will give you powerful proofs of this not mere words, but what you honor more, actions.
And listen to what happened to me, that you may be convinced that I would never yield to any one, if that was wrong, through fear of death, but would die rather than yield.
The tale I am going to tell you is ordinary and commonplace, but true.
I, men of Athens, never held any other office in the state, but I was a senator; and it happened that my tribe held the presidency when you wished to judge collectively, not severally, the ten generals who had failed to gather up the slain after the naval battle; this was illegal, as you all agreed afterwards.
At that time I was the only one of the prytanes who opposed doing anything contrary to the laws, and although the orators were ready to impeach and arrest me, and though you urged them with shouts to do so, I thought I must run the risk to the end with law and justice on my side, rather than join with you when your wishes were unjust, through fear of imprisonment or death.
That was when the democracy still existed; and after the oligarchy was established, the Thirty sent for me with four others to come to the rotunda and ordered us to bring Leon the Salaminian from Salamis to be put to death.
They gave many such orders to others also, because they wished to implicate as many in their crimes as they could.
Then I, however, showed again, by action, not in word only, that I did not care a whit for death if that be not too rude an expression, but that I did care with all my might not to do anything unjust or unholy.
For that government, with all its power, did not frighten me into doing anything unjust, but when we came out of the rotunda, the other four went to Salamis and arrested Leon, but I simply went home;
and perhaps I should have been put to death for it, if the government had not quickly been put down.
Of these facts you can have many witnesses.
Do you believe that I could have lived so many years if I had been in public life and had acted as a good man should act, lending my aid to what is just and considering that of the highest importance?
Far from it, men of Athens; nor could any other man.
But you will find that through all my life, both in public, if I engaged in any public activity, and in private, I have always been the same as now, and have never yielded to any one wrongly, whether it were any other person or any of those who are said by my traducers to be my pupils.
But I was never any one's teacher.
If any one, whether young or old, wishes to hear me speaking and pursuing my mission, I have never objected, nor do I converse only when I am paid and not otherwise, but I offer myself alike to rich and poor; I ask questions, and whoever wishes may answer and hear what I say.
And whether any of them turns out well or ill, I should not justly be held responsible, since I never promised or gave any instruction to any of them; but if any man says that he ever learned or heard anything privately from me, which all the others did not, be assured that he is lying.
But why then do some people love to spend much of their time with me?
You have heard the reason, men of Athens; for I told you the whole truth; it is because they like to listen when those are examined who think they are wise and are not so;
for it is amusing.
But, as I believe, I have been commanded to do this by the God through oracles and dreams and in every way in which any man was ever commanded by divine power to do anything whatsoever.
This, Athenians, is true and easily tested.
For if I am corrupting some of the young men and have corrupted others, surely some of them who have grown older, if they recognize that I ever gave them any bad advice when they were young, ought now to have come forward to accuse me.
Or if they did not wish to do it themselves, some of their relatives fathers or brothers or other kinsfolk ought now to tell the facts.
And there are many of them present, whom I see; first Crito here, who is of my own age and my own deme and father of Critobulus, who is also present; then there is Lysanias the Sphettian, father of Aeschines, who is here; and also Antiphon of Cephisus, father of Epigenes.
Then here are others whose brothers joined in my conversations, Nicostratus, son of Theozotides and brother of Theodotus (now Theodotus is dead, so he could not stop him by entreaties), and Paralus, son of Demodocus; Theages was his brother; and Adimantus, son of Aristo, whose brother is Plato here; and Aeantodorus, whose brother Apollodorus is present.
And I can mention to you many others, some one of whom Meletus ought certainly to have produced as a witness in his speech; but if he forgot it then, let him do so now; I yield the floor to him, and let him say, if he has any such testimony.
But you will find that the exact opposite is the case, gentlemen, and that they are all ready to aid me, the man who corrupts and injures their relatives, as Meletus and Anytus say.
Now those who are themselves corrupted might have some motive in aiding me; but what reason could their relatives have, who are not corrupted and are already older men, unless it be the right and true reason, that they know that Meletus is lying and I am speaking the truth?
Well, gentlemen, this, and perhaps more like this, is about all I have to say in my defence.
Perhaps some one among you may be offended when he remembers his own conduct, if he, even in a case of less importance than this, begged and besought the judges with many tears, and brought forward his children to arouse compassion, and many other friends and relatives; whereas I will do none of these things, though I am, apparently, in the very greatest danger.
Perhaps some one with these thoughts in mind may be harshly disposed toward me and may cast his vote in anger.
Now if any one of you is so disposed I do not believe there is such a person but if there should be, I think I should be speaking fairly if I said to him, My friend, I too have relatives, for I am, as Homer has it, "not born of an oak or a rock,
"but of human parents, so that I have relatives and, men of Athens, I have three sons, one nearly grown up, and two still children;
but nevertheless I shall not bring any of them here and beg you to acquit me.
And why shall I not do so?
Not because I am stubborn, Athenians, or lack respect for you.
Whether I fear death or not is another matter, but for the sake of my good name and yours and that of the whole state, I think it is not right for me to do any of these things in view of my age and my reputation, whether deserved or not; for at any rate the opinion prevails that Socrates is in some way superior to most men.
If then those of you who are supposed to be superior either in wisdom or in courage or in any other virtue whatsoever are to behave in such a way, it would be disgraceful.
Why, I have often seen men who have some reputation behaving in the strangest manner, when they were on trial, as if they thought they were going to suffer something terrible if they were put to death, just as if they would be immortal if you did not kill them.
It seems to me that they are a disgrace to the state and that any stranger might say that those of the Athenians who excel in virtue, men whom they themselves honor with offices and other marks of esteem, are no better than women.
Such acts, men of Athens, we who have any reputation at all ought not to commit, and if we commit them you ought not to allow it, but you should make it clear that you will be much more ready to condemn a man who puts before you such pitiable scenes and makes the city ridiculous than one who keeps quiet.
But apart from the question of reputation, gentlemen, I think it is not right to implore the judge or to get acquitted by begging; we ought to inform and convince him.
For the judge is not here to grant favors in matters of justice, but to give judgement; and his oath binds him not to do favors according to his pleasure, but to judge according to the laws;
therefore, we ought not to get you into the habit of breaking your oaths, nor ought you to fall into that habit; for neither of us would be acting piously.
Do not, therefore, men of Athens, demand of me that I act before you in a way which I consider neither honorable nor right nor pious, especially when impiety is the very thing for which Meletus here has brought me to trial.
For it is plain that if by persuasion and supplication I forced you to break your oaths I should teach you to disbelieve in the existence of the gods and in making my defence should accuse myself of not believing in them.
But that is far from the truth; for I do believe in them, men of Athens, more than any of my accusers, and I entrust my case to you and to God to decide it as shall be best for me and for you.
I am not grieved, men of Athens, at this vote of condemnation you have cast against me, and that for many reasons, among them the fact that your decision was not a surprise to me.
I am much more surprised by the number of votes for and against it;
for I did not expect so small a majority, but a large one.
Now, it seems, if only thirty votes had been cast the other way, I should have been acquitted.
And so, I think, so far as Meletus is concerned, I have even now been acquitted, and not merely acquitted, but anyone can see that, if Anytus and Lycon had not come forward to accuse me, he would have been fined a thousand drachmas for not receiving a fifth part of the votes.
And so the man proposes the penalty of death.
Well, then, what shall I propose as an alternative?
Clearly that which I deserve, shall I not?
And what do I deserve to suffer or to pay, because in my life I did not keep quiet, but neglecting what most men care for money-making and property, and military offices, and public speaking, and the various offices and plots and parties that come up in the state
and thinking that I was really too honorable to engage in those activities and live, refrained from those things by which I should have been of no use to you or to myself, and devoted myself to conferring upon each citizen individually what I regard as the greatest benefit?
For I tried to persuade each of you to care for himself and his own perfection in goodness and wisdom rather than for any of his belongings, and for the state itself rather than for its interests, and to follow the same method in his care for other things.
What, then, does such a man as I deserve?
Some good thing, men of Athens, if I must propose something truly in accordance with my deserts; and the good thing should be such as is fitting for me.
Now what is fitting for a poor man who is your benefactor, and who needs leisure to exhort you?
There is nothing, men of Athens, so fitting as that such a man be given his meals in the prytaneum.
That is much more appropriate for me than for any of you who has won a race at the Olympic games with a pair of horses or a four-in-hand.
For he makes you seem to be happy, whereas I make you happy in reality; and he is not at all in need of sustenance, but I am needy.
So if I must propose a penalty in accordance with my deserts, I propose maintenance in the prytaneum.
Perhaps some of you think that in saying this, as in what I said about lamenting and imploring, I am speaking in a spirit of bravado; but that is not the case, men of Athens.
The truth is rather that I am convinced that I never intentionally wronged anyone; but I cannot convince you of this, for we have conversed with each other only a little while.
I believe if you had a law, as some other people have, that capital cases should not be decided in one day, but only after several days, you would be convinced; but now it is not easy to rid you of great prejudices in a short time.
Since, then, I am convinced that I never wronged any one, I am certainly not going to wrong myself, and to say of myself that I deserve anything bad, and to propose any penalty of that sort for myself.
Why should I fear?
Through fear of the penalty that Meletus proposes, about which I say that I do not know whether it is a good thing or an evil?
Shall I choose instead of that something which I know to be an evil?
And why should I live in prison a slave to those who may be in authority?
Or shall I propose a fine, with imprisonment until it is paid?
But that is the same as what I said just now, for I have no money to pay with.
Shall I then propose exile as my penalty?
Perhaps you would accept that.
I must indeed be possessed by a great love of life if I am so irrational as not to know that if you, who are my fellow citizens, could not endure my conversation and my words, but found them too irksome and disagreeable, so that you are now seeking to be rid of them, others will not be willing to endure them.
No, men of Athens, they certainly will not.
A fine life I should lead if I went away at my time of life, wandering from city to city and always being driven out!
For well I know that wherever I go, the young men will listen to my talk, as they do here; and if I drive them away, they will themselves persuade their elders to drive me out, and if I do not drive them away, their fathers and relatives will drive me out for their sakes.
Perhaps someone might say, "Socrates, can you not go away from us and live quietly, without talking?"
Now this is the hardest thing to make some of you believe.
For if I say that such conduct would be disobedience to the god and that therefore I cannot keep quiet, you will think I am jesting and will not believe me; and if again I say that to talk every day about virtue and the other things about which you hear me talking and examining myself and others is the greatest good to man, and that the unexamined life is not worth living, you will believe me still less.
This is as I say, gentlemen, but it is not easy to convince you.
Besides, I am not accustomed to think that I deserve anything bad.
If I had money, I would have proposed a fine, as large as I could pay; for that would have done me no harm.
But as it is I have no money, unless you are willing to impose a fine which I could pay.
I might perhaps pay a mina of silver.
So I propose that penalty;
but Plato here, men of Athens, and Crito and Critobulus, and Aristobulus tell me to propose a fine of thirty minas, saying that they are sureties for it.
So I propose a fine of that amount, and these men, who are amply sufficient, will be my sureties.
It is no long time, men of Athens, which you gain, and for that those who wish to cast a slur upon the state will give you the name and blame of having killed Socrates, a wise man; for, you know, those who wish to revile you will say I am wise, even though I am not.
Now if you had waited a little while, what you desire would have come to you of its own accord; for you see how old I am, how far advanced in life and how near death.
I say this not to all of you, but to those who voted for my death.
And to them also I have something else to say.
Perhaps you think, gentlemen, that I have been convicted through lack of such words as would have moved you to acquit me, if I had thought it right to do and say everything to gain an acquittal.
Far from it.
And yet it is through a lack that I have been convicted, not however a lack of words, but of impudence and shamelessness, and of willingness to say to you such things as you would have liked best to hear.
You would have liked to hear me wailing and lamenting and doing and saying many things which are, as I maintain, unworthy of me such things as you are accustomed to hear from others.
But I did not think at the time that I ought, on account of the danger I was in, to do anything unworthy of a free man, nor do I now repent of having made my defence as I did, but I much prefer to die after such a defence than to live after a defence of the other sort.
For neither in the court nor in war ought I or any other man to plan to escape death by every possible means.
In battles it is often plain that a man might avoid death by throwing down his arms and begging mercy of his pursuers; and there are many other means of escaping death in dangers of various kinds if one is willing to do and say anything.
But, gentlemen, it is not hard to escape death; it is much harder to escape wickedness, for that runs faster than death.
And now I, since I am slow and old, am caught by the slower runner, and my accusers, who are clever and quick, by the faster, wickedness.
And now I shall go away convicted by you and sentenced to death, and they go convicted by truth of villainy and wrong.
And I abide by my penalty, and they by theirs.
Perhaps these things had to be so, and I think they are well.
And now I wish to prophesy to you, O ye who have condemned me;
for I am now at the time when men most do prophesy, the time just before death.
And I say to you, ye men who have slain me, that punishment will come upon you straight-way after my death, far more grievous in sooth than the punishment of death which you have meted out to me.
For now you have done this to me because you hoped that you would be relieved from rendering an account of your lives, but I say that you will find the result far different.
Those who will force you to give an account will be more numerous than heretofore; men whom I restrained, though you knew it not; and they will be harsher, inasmuch as they are younger, and you will be more annoyed.
For if you think that by putting men to death you will prevent anyone from reproaching you because you do not act as you should, you are mistaken.
That mode of escape is neither possible at all nor honorable, but the easiest and most honorable escape is not by suppressing others, but by making yourselves as good as possible.
So with this prophecy to you who condemned me I take my leave.
But with those who voted for my acquittal I should like to converse about this which has happened, while the authorities are busy and before I go to the place where I must die.
Wait with me so long, my friends; for nothing prevents our chatting with each other while there is time.
I feel that you are my friends,
and I wish to show you the meaning of this which has now happened to me.
For, judges and in calling you judges I give you your right name a wonderful thing has happened to me.
For hitherto the customary prophetic monitor always spoke to me very frequently and opposed me even in very small matters,
if I was going to do anything I should not;
but now, as you yourselves see, this thing which might be thought, and is generally considered, the greatest of evils has come upon me; but the divine sign did not oppose me either when I left my home in the morning, or when I came here to the court, or at any point of my speech, when I was going to say anything;
and yet on other occasions it stopped me at many points in the midst of a speech; but now, in this affair, it has not opposed me in anything I was doing or saying.
What then do I suppose is the reason?
I will tell you.
This which has happened to me is doubtless a good thing, and those of us who think death is an evil must be mistaken.
A convincing proof of this been given me; for the accustomed sign would surely have opposed me if I had not been going to meet with something good.
Let us consider in another way also how good reason there is to hope that it is a good thing.
For the state of death is one of two things:
either it is virtually nothingness, so that the dead has no consciousness of anything, or it is, as people say, a change and migration of the soul from this to another place.
And if it is unconsciousness, like a sleep in which the sleeper does not even dream, death would be a wonderful gain.
For I think if any one were to pick out that night in which he slept a dreamless sleep and, comparing with it the other nights and days of his life, were to say, after due consideration, how many days and nights in his life had passed more pleasantly than that night,
I believe that not only any private person, but even the great King of Persia himself would find that they were few in comparison with the other days and nights.
So if such is the nature of death, I count it a gain; for in that case, all time seems to be no longer than one night.
But on the other hand, if death is, as it were, a change of habitation from here to some other place, and if what we are told is true, that all the dead are there, what greater blessing could there be, judges?
For if a man when he reaches the other world, after leaving behind these who claim to be judges, shall find those who are really judges who are said to sit in judgment there, Minos and Rhadamanthus, and Aeacus and Triptolemus, and all the other demigods who were just men in their lives, would the change of habitation be undesirable?
Or again, what would any of you give to meet with Orpheus and Musaeus and Hesiod and Homer?
I am willing to die many times over, if these things are true;
for I personally should find the life there wonderful, when I met Palamedes or Ajax, the son of Telamon, or any other men of old who lost their lives through an unjust judgement, and compared my experience with theirs.
I think that would not be unpleasant.
And the greatest pleasure would be to pass my time in examining and investigating the people there, as I do those here, to find out who among them is wise and who thinks he is when he is not.
What price would any of you pay, judges, to examine him who led the great army against Troy, or Odysseus, or Sisyphus, or countless others, both men and women, whom I might mention?
To converse and associate with them and examine them would be immeasurable happiness.
At any rate, the folk there do not kill people for it; since, if what we are told is true, they are immortal for all future time, besides being happier in other respects than men are here.
But you also, judges, must regard death hopefully and must bear in mind this one truth, that no evil can come to a good man either in life or after death, and God does not neglect him.
So, too, this which had come to me has not come by chance, but I see plainly that it was better for me to die now and be freed from troubles.
That is the reason why the sign never interfered with me, and I am not at all angry with those who condemned me or with my accusers.
And yet it was not with that in view that they condemned and accused me, but because they thought to injure me.
They deserve blame for that.
However, I make this request of them: when my sons grow up, gentlemen, punish them by troubling them as I have troubled you;
if they seem to you to care for money or anything else more than for virtue, and if they think they amount to something when they do not, rebuke them as I have rebuked you because they do not care for what they ought, and think they amount to something when they are worth nothing.
If you do this, both I and my sons shall have received just treatment from you.
But now the time has come to go away.
I go to die, and you to live; but which of us goes to the better lot, is known to none but God.
Crito
Socrates
Crito
Socrates
Why have you come at this time, Crito?
Or isn't it still early?
Crito
Yes, very early.
Socrates
About what time?
Crito
Just before dawn.
Socrates
I am surprised that the watchman of the prison was willing to let you in.
Crito
He is used to me by this time, Socrates, because I come here so often, and besides I have done something for him.
Socrates
Have you just come, or some time ago?
Crito
Some little time ago.
Socrates
Then why did you not wake me at once, instead of sitting by me in silence?
Crito
No, no, by Zeus, Socrates, I only wish I myself were not so sleepless and sorrowful.
But I have been wondering at you for some time, seeing how sweetly you sleep; and I purposely refrained from waking you, that you might pass the time as pleasantly as possible.
I have often thought throughout your life hitherto that you were of a happy disposition, and I think so more than ever in this resent misfortune, since you bear it so easily and calmly.
Socrates
Well, Crito, it would be absurd if at my age I were disturbed because I must die now.
Crito
Other men as old, Socrates, become involved in similar misfortunes, but their age does not in the least prevent them from being disturbed by their fate.
Socrates
That is true.
But why have you come so early?
Crito
To bring news, Socrates, sad news, though apparently not sad to you, but sad and grievous me and all your friends, and to few of them, I think, so grievous as to me.
Socrates
What is this news?
Has the ship come from Delos, at the arrival of which I am to die?
Crito
It has not exactly come, but I think it will come today from the reports of some men who have come from Sunium and left it there.
Now it is clear from what they say that it will come today, and so tomorrow, Socrates, your life must end.
Socrates
Well, Crito, good luck be with us!
If this is the will of the gods, so be it.
However, I do not think it will come today.
Crito
What is your reason for not thinking so?
Socrates
I will tell you.
I must die on the day after the ship comes in, must I not?
Crito
So those say who have charge of these matters.
Socrates
Well, I think it will not come in today, but tomorrow.
And my reason for this is a dream which I had a little while ago in the course of this night.
And perhaps you let me sleep just at the right time.
Crito
What was the dream?
Socrates
I dreamed that a beautiful, fair woman, clothed in white raiment, came to me and called me and said, "Socrates, "on the third day thou wouldst come to fertile Phthia."
Crito
A strange dream, Socrates.
Socrates
No, a clear one, at any rate, I think, Crito.
Crito
Too clear, apparently.
But, my dear Socrates, even now listen to me and save yourself.
Since, if you die, it will be no mere single misfortune to me, but I shall lose a friend such as I can never find again, and besides, many persons who do not know you and me well will think I could have saved you if I had been willing to spend money, but that I would not take the trouble.
And yet what reputation could be more disgraceful than that of considering one's money of more importance than one's friends?
For most people will not believe that we were eager to help you to go away from here, but you refused.
Socrates
But, my dear Crito, why do we care so much for what most people think?
For the most reasonable men, whose opinion is more worth considering, will think that things were done as they really will be done.
Crito
But you see it is necessary, Socrates, to care for the opinion of the public,
for this very trouble we are in now shows that the public is able to accomplish not by any means the least, but almost the greatest of evils, if one has a bad reputation with it.
Socrates
I only wish, Crito, the people could accomplish the greatest evils, that they might be able to accomplish also the greatest good things.
Then all would be well.
But now they can do neither of the two; for they are not able to make a man wise or foolish, but they do whatever occurs to them.
Crito
That may well be.
But, Socrates, tell me this:
you are not considering me and your other friends, are you, fearing that, if you escape, the informers will make trouble for us by saying that we stole you away, and we shall be forced to lose either all our property or a good deal of money, or be punished in some other way besides?
For if you are afraid of anything of that kind, let it go; since it is right for us to run this risk, and even greater risk than this, if necessary, provided we save you.
Now please do as I ask.
Socrates
I am considering this, Crito, and many other things.
Crito
Well, do not fear this!
for it is not even a large sum of money which we should pay to some men who are willing to save you and get you away from here.
Besides, don't you see how cheap these informers are, and that not much money would be needed to silence them?
And you have my money at your command, which is enough, I fancy; and moreover, if because you care for me you think you ought not to spend my money, there are foreigners here willing to spend theirs; and one of them, Simmias of Thebes, has brought for this especial purpose sufficient funds; and Cebes also and very many others are ready.
So, as I say, do not give up saving yourself through fear of this.
And do not be troubled by what you said in the court, that if you went away you would not know what to do with yourself.
For in many other places, wherever you go, they will welcome you;
and if you wish to go to Thessaly, I have friends there who will make much of you and will protect you, so that no one in Thessaly shall annoy you.
And besides, Socrates, it seems to me the thing you are undertaking to do is not even right betraying yourself when you might save yourself.
And you are eager to bring upon yourself just what your enemies would wish and just what those were eager for who wished to destroy you.
And moreover, I think you are abandoning your children, too, for when you might bring them up and educate them, you are going to desert them and go away, and, so far as you are concerned, their fortunes in life will be whatever they happen to meet with, and they will probably meet with such treatment as generally comes to orphans in their destitution.
Either one ought not to beget children, or one ought to stay by them and bring them up and educate them.
But you seem to me to be choosing the laziest way;
and you ought to choose as a good and brave man would choose, you who have been saying all your life that you cared for virtue.
So I am shamed both for you and for us, your friends, and I am afraid people will think that this whole affair of yours has been conducted with a sort of cowardice on our part both the fact that the case came before the court, when it might have been avoided, and the way in which the trial itself was carried on,
and finally they will think, as the crowning absurdity of the whole affair, that this opportunity has escaped us through some base cowardice on our part, since we did not save you, and you did not save yourself, though it was quite possible if we had been of any use whatever.
Take care, Socrates, that these things be not disgraceful, as well as evil, both to you and to us.
Just consider, or rather it is time not to consider any longer, but to have finished considering.
And there is just one possible plan; for all this must be done in the coming night.
And if we delay it can no longer be done.
But I beg you, Socrates, do as I say and don't refuse.
Socrates
My dear Crito, your eagerness is worth a great deal, if it should prove to be rightly directed; but otherwise, the greater it is, the more hard to bear.
So we must examine the question whether we ought to do this or not; for I am not only now but always a man who follows nothing but the reasoning which on consideration seems to me best.
Aud I cannot, now that this has happened to us, discard the arguments I used to advance, but they seem to me much the same as ever, and I revere and honor the same ones as before.
And unless we can bring forward better ones in our present situation, be assured that I shall not give way to you, not even if the power of the multitude frighten us with even more terrors than at present, as children are frightened with goblins, threatening us with imprisonments and deaths and confiscations of property.
Now how could we examine the matter most reasonably?
Or were we right before I was condemned to death, whereas it has now been made clear that we were talking merely for the sake of argument and it was really mere play and nonsense?
And I wish to investigate, Crito, in common with you, and see whether our former argument seems different to me under our present conditions, or the same, and whether we shall give it up or be guided by it.
But it used to be said, I think, by those who thought they were speaking sensibly, just as I was saying now, that of the opinions held by men some ought to be highly esteemed and others not.
In God's name, Crito, do you not think this is correct?
For you, humanly speaking, are not involved in the necessity of dying tomorrow, and therefore present conditions would not lead your judgment astray.
Now say, do you not think we were correct in saying that we ought not to esteem all the opinions of men, but some and not others, and not those of all men, but only of some?
What do you think?
Is not this true?
Crito
It is.
Socrates
Then we ought to esteem the good opinions and not the bad ones?
Crito
Yes.
Socrates
And the good ones are those of the wise and the bad ones those of the foolish?
Crito
Of course.
Socrates
Come then, what used we to say about this?
If a man is an athlete and makes that his business, does he pay attention to every man's praise and blame and opinion or to those of one man only who is a physician or a trainer?
Crito
To those of one man only.
Socrates
Then he ought to fear the blame and welcome the praise of that one man and not of the multitude.
Crito
Obviously.
Socrates
And he must act and exercise and eat and drink as the one man who is his director and who knows the business thinks best rather than as all the others think.
Crito
That is true.
Socrates
Well then; if he disobeys the one man and disregards his opinion and his praise, but regards words of the many who have no special knowledge, will he not come to harm?
Crito
Of course he will.
Socrates
And what is this harm, In what direction and upon what part of the one who disobeys does it act?
Crito
Evidently upon his body; for that is what it ruins.
Socrates
You speak well.
Then in other matters, not to enumerate them all, in questions of right and wrong and disgraceful and noble and good and bad, which we are now considering, ought we to follow and fear the opinion of the many or that of the one, if there is anyone who knows about them, whom we ought to revere and fear more than all the others?
And if we do not follow him, we shall injure and cripple that which we used to say is benefited by the right and is ruined by the wrong.
Or is there nothing in this?
Crito
I think it is true, Socrates.
Socrates
Well then, if through yielding to the opinion of the ignorant we ruin that which is benefited by health and injured by disease, is life worth living for us when that is ruined?
And that is the body, is it not?
Crito
Yes.
Socrates
Then is life worth living when the body is worthless and ruined?
Crito
Certainly not.
Socrates
But is it worth living when that is ruined which is injured by the wrong and improved by the right?
Or do we think that part of us, whatever it is, which is concerned with right and wrong, is less important than the body?
Crito
By no means.
Socrates
But more important?
Crito
Much more.
Socrates
Then, most excellent friend, we must not consider at all what the many will say of us, but what he who knows about right and wrong, the one man, and truth herself will say.
And so you introduced the discussion wrongly in the first place, when you began by saying we ought to consider the opinion of the multitude about the right and the noble and the good and their opposites.
But it might, of course, be said that the multitude can put us to death.
Crito
That is clear, too.
It would be said, Socrates.
Socrates
But, my friend, the argument we have just finished seems to me still much the same as before; and now see whether we still hold to this, or not, that it is not living, but living well which we ought to consider most important.
Crito
We do hold to it.
Socrates
And that living well and living rightly are the same thing, do we hold to that, or not?
Crito
We do.
Socrates
Then we agree that the question is whether it is right for me to try to escape from here without the permission of the Athenians, or not right.
And if it appears to be right, let us try it, and if not, let us give it up.
But the considerations you suggest, about spending money, and reputation, and bringing up my children, these are really, Crito, the reflections of those who lightly put men to death, and would bring them to life again, if they could, without any sense, I mean the multitude.
But we, since our argument so constrains us, must consider only the question we just broached, whether we shall be doing right in giving money and thanks to these men who will help me to escape, and in escaping or aiding the escape ourselves, or shall in truth be doing wrong, if we do all these things.
And if it appears that it is wrong for us to do them, it may be that we ought not to consider either whether we must die if we stay here and keep quiet or whether we must endure any thing else whatsoever, but only the question of doing wrong.
Crito
I think what you say is right, Socrates; but think what we should do.
Socrates
Let us, my good friend, investigate in common, and if you can contradict anything I say, do so, and I will yield to your arguments; but if you cannot, my dear friend, stop at once saying the same thing to me over and over, that I ought to go away from here without the consent of the Athenians; for I am anxious to act in this matter with your approval, and not contrary to your wishes.
Now see if the beginning of the investigation satisfies you, and try to reply to my questions to the best of your belief.
Crito
I will try.
Crito
We believe.
Socrates
Then we ought not to do wrong at all.
Crito
Why, no.
Socrates
And we ought not even to requite wrong with wrong, as the world thinks, since we must not do wrong at all.
Crito
Apparently not.
Socrates
Well, Crito, ought one to do evil or not?
Crito
Certainly not, Socrates.
Socrates
Well, then, is it right to requite evil with evil, as the world says it is, or not right?
Crito
Not right, certainly.
Socrates
For doing evil to people is the same thing as wronging them.
Crito
That is true.
Socrates
Then we ought neither to requite wrong with wrong nor to do evil to anyone, no matter what he may have done to us.
And be careful, Crito, that you do not, in agreeing to this, agree to something you do not believe; for I know that there are few who believe or ever will believe this.
Now those who believe this, and those who do not, have no common ground of discussion, but they must necessarily, in view of their opinions, despise one another.
Do you therefore consider very carefully whether you agree and share in this opinion, and let us take as the the starting point of our discussion the assumption that it is never right to do wrong or to requite wrong with wrong, or when we suffer evil to defend ourselves by doing evil in return.
Or do you disagree and refuse your assent to this starting point?
For I have long held this belief and I hold it yet, but if you have reached any other conclusion, speak and explain it to me.
If you still hold to our former opinion, hear the next point.
Crito
I do hold to it and I agree with you; so go on.
Socrates
Now the next thing I say, or rather ask, is this: "ought a man to do what he has agreed to do, provided it is right, or may he violate his agreements?"
Crito
He ought to do it.
Socrates
Then consider whether,
if we go away from here without the consent of the state, we are doing harm to the very ones to whom we least ought to do harm, or not,
and whether we are abiding by what we agreed was right, or not.
Crito
I cannot answer your question, Socrates, for I do not understand.
Socrates
Consider it in this way.
If, as I was on the point of running away (or whatever it should be called), the laws and the commonwealth should come to me and ask, "Tell me, Socrates, what have you in mind to do?
Are you not intending by this thing you are trying to do, to destroy us, the laws, and the entire state, so far as in you lies?
Or do you think that state can exist and not be overturned, in which the decisions reached by the courts have no force but are made invalid and annulled by private persons?"
What shall we say, Crito, in reply to this question and others of the same kind?
For one might say many things, especially if one were an orator, about the destruction of that law which provides that the decisions reached by the courts shall be valid.
Or shall we say to them, "The state wronged me and did not judge the case rightly"?
Shall we say that, or what?
Crito
That is what we shall say, by Zeus, Socrates.
Socrates
What then if the laws should say, "Socrates, is this the agreement you made with us, or did you agree to abide by the verdicts pronounced by the state?"
Now if I were surprised by what they said, perhaps they would continue, "Don't be surprised at what we say, Socrates, but answer, since you are in the habit of employing the method of question and answer.
Come, what fault do you find with us and the state, that you are trying to destroy us?
In the first place, did we not bring you forth?
Is it not through us that your father married your mother and begat you?
Now tell us, have you any fault to find with those of us who are the laws of marriage?"
"I find no fault," I should say.
"Or with those that have to do with the nurture of the child after he is born and with his education which you, like others, received?
Did those of us who are assigned to these matters not give good directions when we told your father to educate you in music and gymnastics?"
"You did," I should say.
"Well then, when you were born and nurtured and educated, could you say to begin with that you were not our offspring and our slave, you yourself and your ancestors?
And if this is so, do you think right as between you and us rests on a basis of equality, so that whatever we undertake to do to you it is right for you to retaliate?
There was no such equality of right between you and your father or your master, if you had one, so that whatever treatment you received you might return it, answering them if you were reviled, or striking back if you were struck, and the like;
and do you think that it will be proper for you to act so toward your country and the laws, so that if we undertake to destroy you, thinking it is right, you will undertake in return to destroy us laws and your country, so far as you are able, and will say that in doing this you are doing right, you who really care for virtue?
Or is your wisdom such that you do not see that your country is more precious and more to be revered and is holier and in higher esteem among the gods and among men of understanding than your mother and your father and all your ancestors, and that you ought to show to her more reverence and obedience and humility when she is angry than to your father, and ought either to convince her by persuasion or to do whatever she commands, and to suffer, if she commands you to suffer, in silence, and if she orders you to be scourged or imprisoned or if she leads you to war to be wounded or slain, her will is to be done, and this is right, and you must not give way or draw back or leave your post, but in war and in court and everywhere, you must do whatever the state, your country, commands, or must show her by persuasion what is really right,
but that it is impious to use violence against either your father or your mother, and much more impious to use it against your country?"
What shall we reply to this, Crito?
That the laws speak the truth, or not?
Crito
I think they do.
Socrates
"Observe then, Socrates," perhaps the laws would say, "that if what we say is true, what you are now undertaking to do to us is not right.
For we brought you into the world, nurtured you, and gave a share of all the good things we could to you and all the citizens.
Yet we proclaim, by having offered the opportunity to any of the Athenians who wishes to avail himself of it, that anyone who is not pleased with us when he has become a man and has seen the administration of the city and us, the laws, may take his goods and go away wherever he likes.
And none of us stands in the way or forbids any of you to take his goods and go away wherever he pleases, if we and the state do not please him, whether it be to an Athenian colony or to a foreign country where he will live as an alien.
But we say that whoever of you stays here, seeing how we administer justice and how we govern the state in other respects, has thereby entered into an agreement with us to do what we command; and we say that he who does not obey does threefold wrong, because he disobeys us who are his parents, because he disobeys us who nurtured him, and because after agreeing to obey us he neither obeys us nor convinces us that we are wrong, though we give him the opportunity and do not roughly order him to do what we command, but when we allow him a choice of two things, either to convince us of error or to do our bidding, he does neither of these things."
"We say that you, Socrates, will be exposed to these reproaches, if you do what you have in mind, and you not least of the Athenians but more than most others."
If then I should say, "How so?"
perhaps they might retort with justice that I had made this agreement with them more emphatically than most other Athenians.
For they would say, "Socrates, we have strong evidence that we and the city pleased you;
for you would never have stayed in it more than all other Athenians if you had not been better pleased with it than they; you never went out from the city to a festival, or anywhere else, except on military service, and you never made any other journey, as other people do, and you had no wish to know any other city or other laws, but you were contented with us and our city.
So strongly did you prefer us and agree to live in accordance with us; and besides, you begat children in the city, showing that it pleased you.
And moreover even at your trial you might have offered exile as your penalty, if you wished, and might have done with the state's consent what you are now undertaking to do without it.
But you then put on airs and said you were not disturbed if you must die, and you preferred, as you said, death to exile.
And now you are not ashamed to think of those words and you do not respect us, the laws, since you are trying to bring us to naught; and you are doing what the meanest slave would do, since you are trying to run away contrary to the compacts and agreements you made with us that you would live in accordance with us.
First then, answer this question, whether we speak the truth or not when we say that you agreed, not in word, but by your acts, to live in accordance with us."
What shall we say to this, Crito?
Must we not agree that it is true?
Crito
We must, Socrates.
Socrates
"Are you then," they would say, "not breaking your compacts and agreements with us, though you were not led into them by compulsion or fraud, and were not forced to make up your mind in a short time, but had seventy years, in which you could have gone away, if we did not please you and if you thought the agreements were unfair?
But you preferred neither Lacedaemon nor Crete, which you are always saying are well governed, nor any other of the Greek states, or of the foreign ones, but you went away from this city less than the lame and the blind and the other cripples.
So much more than the other Athenians were you satisfied with the city and evidently therefore with us, its laws; for who would be pleased with a city apart from its laws?
And now will you not abide by your agreement?
You will if you take our advice, Socrates; and you will not make yourself ridiculous by going away from the city.
"For consider.
By transgressing in this way and committing these errors, what good will you do to yourself or any of your friends?
For it is pretty clear that your friends also will be exposed to the risk of banishment and the loss of their homes in the city or of their property.
And you yourself, if you go to one of the nearest cities, to Thebes or Megara for both are well governed will go as an enemy, Socrates, to their government, and all who care for their own cities will look askance at you, and will consider you a destroyer of the laws, and you will confirm the judges in their opinion, so that they will think their verdict was just.
For he who is destroyer of the laws might certainly be regarded as a destroyer of young and thoughtless men.
Will you then avoid the well-governed cities and the most civilized men?
And if you do this will your life be worth living?
Or will you go to them and have the face to carry on what kind of conversation, Socrates?
The same kind you carried on here, saying that virtue and justice and lawful things and the laws are the most precious things to men?
And do you not think that the conduct of Socrates would seem most disgraceful?
You cannot help thinking so.
Or you will keep away from these places and go to Crito's friends in Thessaly;
for there great disorder and lawlessness prevail, and perhaps they would be amused to hear of the ludicrous way in which you ran away from prison by putting on a disguise, a peasant's leathern cloak or some of the other things in which runaways dress themselves up, and changing your appearance.
But will no one say that you, an old man, who had probably but a short time yet to live, clung to life with such shameless greed that you transgressed the highest laws?
Perhaps not, if you do not offend anyone; but if you do, Socrates, you will have to listen to many things that would be a disgrace to you.
So you will live as an inferior and a slave to everyone.
And what will you do except feast in Thessaly, as if you had gone to Thessaly to attend a banquet?
What will become of our conversations about justice and virtue?
But perhaps you wish to live for the sake of your children, that you may bring them up and educate them?
Will you take them to Thessaly to be brought up and educated, making exiles of them, that you may give them that blessing also?
Or perhaps you will not do that, but if they are brought up here while you are living, will they be better brought up and educated if you are not with them than if you were dead?
For your friends will care for them.
Will they care for them if you go away to Thessaly and not if you go away to the dwellings of the dead?
If those who say they are your friends are of any use, we must believe they will care for them in both cases alike.
"Ah, Socrates, be guided by us who tended your infancy, care neither for your children nor for life nor for anything else more than for the right, that when you come to the home of the dead, you may have all these things to say in your own defence.
For clearly if you do this thing it will not be better for you here, or more just or holier, no, nor for any of your friends, and neither will it be better when you reach that other abode.
Now, however, you will go away wronged, if you do go away, not by us, the laws, but by men;
but if you escape after so disgracefully requiting wrong with wrong and evil with evil, breaking your compacts and agreements with us, and injuring those whom you least ought to injure yourself, your friends, your country and us we shall be angry with you while you live, and there our brothers, the laws in Hades' realm, will not receive you graciously; for they will know that you tried, so far as in you lay, to destroy us.
Do not let Crito persuade you to do what he says, but take our advice.
Be well assured, my dear friend, Crito, that this is what I seem to hear, as the frenzied dervishes of Cybele seem to hear the flutes, and this sound of these words re-echoes within me and prevents my hearing any other words.
And be assured that, so far as I now believe, if you argue against these words you will speak in vain.
Nevertheless, if you think you can accomplish anything, speak.
Crito
No, Socrates, I have nothing to say.
Socrates
Then, Crito, let it be; and let us act in this way, since it is in this way that God leads us.
Phaedo
Echecrates
Phaedo
Echecrates
Were you with Socrates yourself, Phaedo, on the day when he drank the poison in prison, or did you hear about it from someone else?
Phaedo
I was there myself, Echecrates.
Echecrates
Then what did he say before his death?
and how did he die?
I should like to hear,
for nowadays none of the Phliasians go to Athens at all, and no stranger has come from there for a long time, who could tell us anything definite about this matter, except that he drank poison and died, so we could learn no further details.
Phaedo
Did you not even hear about the trial and how it was conducted?
Echecrates
Yes, some one told us about that, and we wondered that although it took place a long time ago, he was put to death much later.
Now why was that, Phaedo?
Phaedo
It was a matter of chance, Echecrates.
It happened that the stern of the ship which the Athenians send to Delos was crowned on the day before the trial.
Echecrates
What ship is this?
Phaedo
This is the ship, as the Athenians say, in which Theseus once went to Crete with the fourteen youths and maidens, and saved them and himself.
Now they made a vow to Apollo, as the story goes, that if they were saved they would send a mission every year to Delos.
And from that time even to the present day they send it annually in honor of the god.
Now it is their law that after the mission begins the city must be pure and no one may be publicly executed until the ship has gone to Delos and back; and sometimes, when contrary winds detain it, this takes a long time.
The beginning of the mission is when the priest of Apollo crowns the stern of the ship; and this took place, as I say, on the day before the trial.
For that reason Socrates passed a long time in prison between his trial and his death.
Echecrates
What took place at his death, Phaedo?
What was said and done?
And which of his friends were with him?
Or did the authorities forbid them to be present, so that he died without his friends?
Phaedo
Not at all.
Some were there, in fact, a good many.
Echecrates
Be so good as to tell us as exactly as you can about all these things, if you are not too busy.
Phaedo
I am not busy and I will try to tell you.
It is always my greatest pleasure to be reminded of Socrates whether by speaking of him myself or by listening to someone else.
Echecrates
Well, Phaedo, you will have hearers who feel as you do; so try to tell us everything as accurately as you can.
Phaedo
For my part, I had strange emotions when I was there.
For I was not filled with pity as I might naturally be when present at the death of a friend; since he seemed to me to be happy, Echecrates, both in his bearing and his words, he was meeting death so fearlessly and nobly.
And so I thought that even in going to the abode of the dead he was not going without the protection of the gods, and that when he arrived there it would be well with him, if it ever was well with anyone.
And for this reason I was not at all filled with pity, as might seem natural when I was present at a scene of mourning; nor on the other hand did I feel pleasure because we were occupied with philosophy, as was our custom and our talk was of philosophy; but a very strange feeling came over me, an unaccustomed mixture of pleasure and of pain together, when I thought that Socrates was presently to die.
And all of us who were there were in much the same condition, sometimes laughing and sometimes weeping; especially one of us, Apollodorus; you know him and his character.
Echecrates
To be sure I do.
Phaedo
He was quite unrestrained, and I was much agitated myself, as were the others.
Echecrates
Who were these, Phaedo?
Phaedo
Of native Athenians there was this Apollodorus, and Critobulus and his father, and Hermogenes and Epiganes and Aeschines and Antisthenes; and Ctesippus the Paeanian was there too, and Menexenus and some other Athenians.
But Plato, I think, was ill.
Echecrates
Were any foreigners there?
Phaedo
Yes, Simmias of Thebes and Cebes and Phaedonides, and from Megara Euclides and Terpsion.
Echecrates
What, Were Aristippus and Cleombrotus there?
Phaedo
No.
They were said to be in Aegina.
Echecrates
Was anyone else there?
Phaedo
I think these were about all.
Echecrates
Well then, what was the conversation?
Phaedo
I will try to tell you everything from the beginning.
On the previous days I and the others had always been in the habit of visiting Socrates.
We used to meet at daybreak in the court where the trial took place, for it was near the prison;
and every day we used to wait about, talking with each other, until the prison was opened, for it was not opened early;
and when it was opened, we went in to Socrates and passed most of the day with him.
On that day we came together earlier;
for the day before, when we left the prison in the evening we heard that the ship had arrived from Delos.
So we agreed to come to the usual place as early in the morning as possible.
And we came, and the jailer who usually answered the door came out and told us to wait and not go in until he told us.
"For," he said, "the eleven are releasing Socrates from his fetters and giving directions how he is to die today."
So after a little delay he came and told us to go in.
We went in then and found Socrates just released from his fetters and Xanthippe you know her with his little son in her arms, sitting beside him.
Now when Xanthippe saw us, she cried out and said the kind of thing that women always do say: "Oh Socrates, this is the last time now that your friends will speak to you or you to them."
And Socrates glanced at Crito and said, "Crito, let somebody take her home."
And some of Crito's people took her away wailing and beating her breast.
But Socrates sat up on his couch and bent his leg and rubbed it with his hand, and while he was rubbing it, he said, "What a strange thing, my friends, that seems to be which men call pleasure!
How wonderfully it is related to that which seems to be its opposite, pain, in that they will not both come to a man at the same time, and yet if he pursues the one and captures it he is generally obliged to take the other also, as if the two were joined together in one head.
And I think," he said, "if Aesop had thought of them, he would have made a fable telling how they were at war and god wished to reconcile them, and when he could not do that, he fastened their heads together, and for that reason, when one of them comes to anyone, the other follows after.
Just so it seems that in my case, after pain was in my leg on account of the fetter, pleasure appears to have come following after."
Here Cebes interrupted and said, "By Zeus, Socrates, I am glad you reminded me.
Several others have asked about the poems you have composed, the metrical versions of Aesop's fables and the hymn to Apollo, and Evenus asked me the day before yesterday why you never wrote any poetry before, composed these verses after you came to prison.
Now, if you care that I should be able to answer Evenus when he asks me again and I know he will ask me tell me what to say."
"Then tell him, Cebes," said he, "the truth, that I composed these verses not because I wished to rival him or his poems, for I knew that would not be easy, but because I wished to test the meaning of certain dreams, and to make sure that I was neglecting no duty in case their repeated commands meant that I must cultivate the Muses in this way.
They were something like this.
The same dream came to me often in my past life, sometimes in one form and sometimes in another, but always saying the same thing: 'Socrates,' it said, 'make music and work at it.'
And I formerly thought it was urging and encouraging me to do what I was doing already and that just as people encourage runners by cheering, so the dream was encouraging me to do what I was doing, that is, to make music, because philosophy was the greatest kind of music and I was working at that.
But now, after the trial and while the festival of the god delayed my execution, I thought, in case the repeated dream really meant to tell me to make this which is ordinarily called music, I ought to do so and not to disobey.
For I thought it was safer not to go hence before making sure that I had done what I ought, by obeying the dream and composing verses.
So first I composed a hymn to the god whose festival it was; and after the god, considering that a poet, if he is really to be a poet, must compose myths and not speeches, since I was not a maker of myths, I took the myths of Aesop, which I had at hand and knew, and turned into verse the first I came upon.
So tell Evenus that, Cebes, and bid him farewell, and tell him, if he is wise, to come after me as quickly as he can.
I, it seems, am going today; for that is the order of the Athenians."
And Simmias said, "What a message that is, Socrates, for Evenus!
I have met him often, and from what I have seen of him, I should say that he will not take your advice in the least if he can help it."
"Why so?" said he. "Is not Evenus a philosopher?"
"I think so," said Simmias.
"Then Evenus will take my advice, and so will every man who has any worthy interest in philosophy.
Perhaps, however, he will not take his own life, for they say that is not permitted."
And as he spoke he put his feet down on the ground and remained sitting in this way through the rest of the conversation.
Then Cebes asked him: "What do you mean by this, Socrates, that it is not permitted to take one's life, but that the philosopher would desire to follow after the dying?"
"How is this, Cebes?
Have you and Simmias, who are pupils of Philolaus, not heard about such things?"
"Nothing definite, Socrates."
"I myself speak of them only from hearsay; but I have no objection to telling what I have heard.
And indeed it is perhaps especially fitting, as I am going to the other world, to tell stories about the life there and consider what we think about it; for what else could one do in the time between now and sunset?"
"Why in the world do they say that it is not permitted to kill oneself, Socrates?
I heard Philolaus, when he was living in our city, say the same thing you just said, and I have heard it from others, too, that one must not do this; but I never heard anyone say anything definite about it."
"You must have courage," said he, "and perhaps you might hear something.
But perhaps it will seem strange to you that this alone of all laws is without exception, and it never happens to mankind, as in other matters, that only at some times and for some persons it is better to die than to live; and it will perhaps seem strange to you that these human beings for whom it is better to die cannot without impiety do good to themselves, but must wait for some other benefactor."
And Cebes, smiling gently, said, "Gawd knows it doos," speaking in his own dialect.
"It would seem unreasonable, if put in this way," said Socrates, "but perhaps there is some reason in it.
Now the doctrine that is taught in secret about this matter, that we men are in a kind of prison and must not set ourselves free or run away, seems to me to be weighty and not easy to understand.
But this at least, Cebes, I do believe is sound, that the gods are our guardians and that we men are one of the chattels of the gods.
Do you not believe this?"
"Yes," said Cebes, "I do."
"Well then," said he, "if one of your chattels should kill itself when you had not indicated that you wished it to die, would you be angry with it and punish it if you could?"
"Certainly," he replied.
"Then perhaps from this point of view it is not unreasonable to say that a man must not kill himself until god sends some necessity upon him, such as has now come upon me."
"That," said Cebes, "seems sensible.
But what you said just now, Socrates, that philosophers ought to be ready and willing to die, that seems strange if we were right just now in saying that god is our guardian and we are his possessions.
For it is not reasonable that the wisest men should not be troubled when they leave that service in which the gods, who are the best overseers in the world, are watching over them.
For he certainly does not think that when he is free he can take better care of himself than they do.
A foolish man might perhaps think so, that he ought to run away from his master, and he would not consider that he must not run away from a good master, but ought to stay with him as long as possible; and so he might thoughtlessly run away; but a man of sense would wish to be always with one who is better than himself.
And yet, Socrates, if we look at it in this way, the contrary of what we just said seems natural; for the wise ought to be troubled at dying and the foolish to rejoice."
When Socrates heard this I thought he was pleased by Cebes' earnestness, and glancing at us, he said, "Cebes is always on the track of arguments and will not be easily convinced by whatever anyone says."
And Simmias said, "Well, Socrates, this time I think myself that Cebes is right.
For why should really wise men run away from masters who are better than they and lightly separate themselves from them?
And it strikes me that Cebes is aiming his argument at you, because you are so ready to leave us and the gods, who are, as you yourself agree, good rulers."
"You have a right to say that," he replied; "for I think you mean that I must defend myself against this accusation, as if we were in a law court."
"Precisely," said Simmias.
"Well, then," said he, "I will try to make a more convincing defence than I did before the judges.
For if I did not believe, Simmias and Cebes," said he, "that I was going to other wise and good gods, and, moreover, to men who have died, better men than those here, I should be wrong in not grieving at death.
But as it is, you may rest assured that I expect to go to good men, though I should not care to assert this positively; but I would assert as positively as anything about such matters that I am going to gods who are good masters.
And therefore, so far as that is concerned, I not only do not grieve, but I have great hopes that there is something in store for the dead, and, as has been said of old, something better for the good than for the wicked."
"Well," said Simmias, "do you intend to go away, Socrates?"
and keep your opinion to yourself, or would you let us share it?
It seems to me that this is a good which belongs in common to us also, and at the same time, if you convince us by what you say, that will serve as your defence."
"I will try," he replied.
"But first let us ask Crito there what he wants, he has apparently been trying to say something for a long time."
"Only, Socrates," said Crito, "that the man who is to administer the poison to you has been telling me for some time to warn you to talk as little as possible.
He says people get warm when they talk and heat has a bad effect on the action of the poison; so sometimes he has to make those who talk too much drink twice or even three times."
And Socrates said: "Never mind him.
Just let him do his part and prepare to give it twice or even, if necessary, three times."
"I was pretty sure that was what you would say," said Crito, "but he has been bothering me for a long time."
"Never mind him," said Socrates.
"I wish now to explain to you, my judges, the reason why I think a man who has really spent his life in philosophy is naturally of good courage when he is to die, and has strong hopes that when he is dead he will attain the greatest blessings in that other land.
So I will try to tell you, Simmias, and Cebes, how this would be.
"Other people are likely not to be aware that those who pursue philosophy aright study nothing but dying and being dead.
Now if this is true, it would be absurd to be eager for nothing but this all their lives, and then to be troubled when that came for which they had all along been eagerly practicing."
And Simmias laughed and said, "By Zeus, Socrates, I don't feel much like laughing just now, but you made me laugh.
For I think the multitude, if they heard what you just said about the philosophers, would say you were quite right, and our people at home would agree entirely with you that philosophers desire death, and they would add that they know very well that the philosophers deserve it."
"And they would be speaking the truth, Simmias, except in the matter of knowing very well.
For they do not know in what way the real philosophers desire death, nor in what way they deserve death, nor what kind of a death it is.
Let us then," said he, "speak with one another, paying no further attention to them.
Do we think there is such a thing as death?"
"Certainly," replied Simmias.
"We believe, do we not, that death is the separation of the soul from the body?
and that the state of being dead is the state in which the body is separated from the soul and exists alone by itself and the soul is separated from the body and exists alone by itself?
Is death anything other than this?"
"No, it is this," said he.
"Now, my friend, see if you agree with me; for, if you do, I think we shall get more light on our subject.
Do you think a philosopher would be likely to care much about the so-called pleasures, such as eating and drinking?"
"By no means, Socrates," said Simmias.
"How about the pleasures of love?"
"Certainly not."
"Well, do you think such a man would think much of the other cares of the body?
I mean such as the possession of fine clothes and shoes and the other personal adornments?
Do you think he would care about them or despise them, except so far as it is necessary to have them?"
"I think the true philosopher would despise them," he replied.
"Altogether, then, you think that such a man would not devote himself to the body, but would, so far as he was able, turn away from the body and concern himself with the soul?"
"Yes."
"To begin with, then, it is clear that in such matters the philosopher, more than other men, separates the soul from communion with the body?"
"It is."
"Now certainly most people think that a man who takes no pleasure and has no part in such things doesn't deserve to live, and that one who cares nothing for the pleasures of the body is about as good as dead."
"That is very true."
"Now, how about the acquirement of pure knowledge?
Is the body a hindrance or not, if it is made to share in the search for wisdom?
What I mean is this: Have the sight and hearing of men any truth in them, or is it true, as the poets are always telling us, that we neither hear nor see any thing accurately?
And yet if these two physical senses are not accurate or exact, the rest are not likely to be, for they are inferior to these.
Do you not think so?"
"Certainly I do," he replied.
"Then," said he, "when does the soul attain to truth?
For when it tries to consider anything in company with the body, it is evidently deceived by it."
"True."
"In thought, then, if at all, something of the realities becomes clear to it?"
"Yes."
"But it thinks best when none of these things troubles it, neither hearing nor sight, nor pain nor any pleasure, but it is, so far as possible, alone by itself, and takes leave of the body, and avoiding, so far as it can, all association or contact with the body, reaches out toward the reality."
"That is true."
"In this matter also, then, the soul of the philosopher greatly despises the body and avoids it and strives to be alone by itself?"
"Evidently."
"Now how about such things as this, Simmias?
Do we think there is such a thing as absolute justice, or not?"
"We certainly think there is."
"And absolute beauty and goodness."
"Of course."
"Well, did you ever see anything of that kind with your eyes?"
"Certainly not," said he.
"Or did you ever reach them with any of the bodily senses?
I am speaking of all such things, as size, health, strength, and in short the essence or underlying quality of everything.
Is their true nature contemplated by means of the body?
Is it not rather the case that he who prepares himself most carefully to understand the true essence of each thing that he examines would come nearest to the knowledge of it?"
"Certainly."
"Would not that man do this most perfectly who approaches each thing, so far as possible, with the reason alone, not introducing sight into his reasoning nor dragging in any of the other senses along with his thinking,
but who employs pure, absolute reason in his attempt to search out the pure, absolute essence of things, and who removes himself, so far as possible, from eyes and ears, and, in a word, from his whole body, because he feels that its companionship disturbs the soul and hinders it from attaining truth and wisdom?
Is not this the man, Simmias, if anyone, to attain to the knowledge of reality?"
"That is true as true can be, Socrates," said Simmias.
"Then," said he, "all this must cause good lovers of wisdom to think and say one to the other something like this:
'There seems to be a short cut which leads us and our argument to the conclusion in our search that so long as we have the body, and the soul is contaminated by such an evil, we shall never attain completely what we desire, that is, the truth.
For the body keeps us constantly busy by reason of its need of sustenance;
and moreover, if diseases come upon it they hinder our pursuit of the truth.
And the body fills us with passions and desires and fears, and all sorts of fancies and foolishness, so that, as they say, it really and truly makes it impossible for us to think at all.
The body and its desires are the only cause of wars and factions and battles;
for all wars arise for the sake of gaining money, and we are compelled to gain money for the sake of the body.
We are slaves to its service.
And so, because of all these things, we have no leisure for philosophy.
But the worst of all is that if we do get a bit of leisure and turn to philosophy, the body is constantly breaking in upon our studies and disturbing us with noise and confusion, so that it prevents our beholding the truth, and in fact we perceive that, if we are ever to know anything absolutely, we must be free from the body and must behold the actual realities with the eye of the soul alone.
And then, as our argument shows, when we are dead we are likely to possess the wisdom which we desire and claim to be enamored of, but not while we live.
For, if pure knowledge is impossible while the body is with us, one of two thing must follow, either it cannot be acquired at all or only when we are dead; for then the soul will be by itself apart from the body, but not before.
And while we live, we shall, I think, be nearest to knowledge when we avoid, so far as possible, intercourse and communion with the body, except what is absolutely necessary, and are not filled with its nature, but keep ourselves pure from it until God himself sets us free.
And in this way, freeing ourselves from the foolishness of the body and being pure, we shall, I think, be with the pure and shall know of ourselves all that is pure, and that is, perhaps, the truth.
For it cannot be that the impure attain the pure.'
Such words as these, I think, Simmias, all who are rightly lovers of knowledge must say to each other and such must be their thoughts.
Do you not agree?"
"Most assuredly, Socrates."
"Then," said Socrates, "if this is true, my friend, I have great hopes that when I reach the place to which I am going, I shall there, if anywhere, attain fully to that which has been my chief object in my past life, so that the journey which is now imposed upon me is begun with good hope; and the like hope exists for every man who thinks that his mind has been purified and made ready."
"Certainly," said Simmias.
"And does not the purification consist in this which has been mentioned long ago in our discourse, in separating, so far as possible, the soul from the body and teaching the soul the habit of collecting and bringing itself together from all parts of the body, and living, so far as it can, both now and hereafter, alone by itself, freed from the body as from fetters?"
"Certainly," said he.
"Well, then, this is what we call death, is it not, a release and separation from the body?"
"Exactly so," said he.
"But, as we hold, the true philosophers and they alone are always most eager to release the soul, and just this the release and separation of the soul from the body is their study, is it not?"
"Obviously."
"Then, as I said in the beginning, it would be absurd if a man who had been all his life fitting himself to live as nearly in a state of death as he could, should then be disturbed when death came to him.
"Of course."
"In fact, then, Simmias," said he, "the true philosophers practice dying, and death is less terrible to them than to any other men.
Consider it in this way.
They are in every way hostile to the body and they desire to have the soul apart by itself alone.
Would it not be very foolish if they should be frightened and troubled when this very thing happens, and if they should not be glad to go to the place where there is hope of attaining what they longed for all through life and they longed for wisdom and of escaping from the companionship of that which they hated?
When human loves or wives or sons have died, many men have willingly gone to the other world led by the hope of seeing there those whom they longed for, and of being with them; and shall he who is really in love with wisdom and has a firm belief that he can find it nowhere else than in the other world grieve when he dies and not be glad to go there?
We cannot think that, my friend, if he is really a philosopher; for he will confidently believe that he will find pure wisdom nowhere else than in the other world.
And if this is so, would it not be very foolish for such a man to fear death?"
"Very foolish, certainly," said he.
"Then is it not," said Socrates, "a sufficient indication, when you see a man troubled because he is going to die, that he was not a lover of wisdom but a lover of the body?
And this same man is also a lover of money and of honor, one or both."
"Certainly," said he, "it is as you say."
"Then, Simmias," he continued, "is not that which is called courage especially characteristic of philosophers?"
"By all means," said he.
"And self-restraint that which is commonly called self-restraint, which consists in not being excited by the passions and in being superior to them and acting in a seemly way is not that characteristic of those alone who despise the body and pass their lives in philosophy?"
"Necessarily," said he.
"For," said Socrates, "if you care to consider the courage and the self-restraint of other men, you will see that they are absurd."
"How so, Socrates?"
"You know, do you not, that all other men count death among the great evils?"
"They certainly do."
"And do not brave men face death when they do face it through fear of greater evils?"
"That is true."
"Then all except philosophers are brave through fear.
And yet it is absurd to be brave through fear and cowardice."
"Very true."
"And how about those of seemly conduct?
We say, to be sure, that this is impossible, nevertheless their foolish self-restraint amounts to little more than this;
for they fear that they may be deprived of certain pleasures which they desire, and so they refrain from some because they are under the sway of others.
And yet being ruled by pleasures is called self-indulgence.
Nevertheless they conquer pleasures because they are conquered by other pleasures.
Now this is about what I said just now, that they are self-restrained by a kind of self-indulgence."
"So it seems."
"My dear Simmias, I suspect that this is not the right way to purchase virtue, by exchanging pleasures for pleasures, and pains for pains, and fear for fear, and greater for less, as if they were coins,
but the only right coinage, for which all those things must be exchanged and by means of and with which all these things are to be bought and sold, is in fact wisdom; and courage and self-restraint and justice and, in short, true virtue exist only with wisdom, whether pleasures and fears and other things of that sort are added or taken away.
And virtue which consists in the exchange of such things for each other without wisdom, is but a painted imitation of virtue and is really slavish and has nothing healthy or true in it; but truth is in fact a purification from all these things, and self-restraint and justice and courage and wisdom itself are a kind of purification.
And I fancy that those men who established the mysteries were not unenlightened, but in reality had a hidden meaning when they said long ago that whoever goes uninitiated and unsanctified to the other world will lie in the mire, but he who arrives there initiated and purified will dwell with the gods.
For as they say in the mysteries, 'the thyrsus-bearers are many, but the mystics few';
and these mystics are, I believe, those who have been true philosophers.
And I in my life have, so far as I could, left nothing undone, and have striven in every way to make myself one of them.
But whether I have striven aright and have met with success, I believe I shall know clearly, when I have arrived there, very soon, if it is God's will.
This then, Simmias and Cebes, is the defence I offer to show that it is reasonable for me not to be grieved or troubled at leaving you and the rulers I have here, because I believe that there, no less than here, I shall find good rulers and friends.
If now I am more successful in convincing you by my defence than I was in convincing my Athenian judges, it is well."
When Socrates had finished, Cebes answered and said:
"Socrates, I agree to the other things you say, but in regard to the soul men are very prone to disbelief.
They fear that when the soul leaves the body it no longer exists anywhere, and that on the day when the man dies it is destroyed and perishes, and when it leaves the body and departs from it, straightway it flies away and is no longer anywhere, scattering like a breath or smoke.
If it exists anywhere by itself as a unit, freed from these evils which you have enumerated just now, there would be good reason for the blessed hope, Socrates, that what you say is true.
But perhaps no little argument and proof is required to show that when a man is dead the soul still exists and has any power and intelligence."
"What you say, Cebes, is true," said Socrates.
"Now what shall we do?
Do you wish to keep on conversing about this to see whether it is probable or not?"
"I do," said Cebes.
"I should like to hear what you think about it."
"Well," said Socrates, "I do not believe anyone who heard us now, even if he were a comic poet, would say that I am chattering and talking about things which do not concern me.
So if you like, let us examine the matter to the end.
"Let us consider it by asking whether the souls of men who have died are in the nether world or not.
There is an ancient tradition, which we remember, that they go there from here and come back here again and are born from the dead.
Now if this is true, if the living are born again from the dead, our souls would exist there, would they not?
For they could not be born again if they did not exist, and this would be a sufficient proof that they exist, if it should really be made evident that the living are born only from the dead.
But if this is not so then some other argument would be needed."
"Certainly," said Cebes.
"Now," said he, "if you wish to find this out easily, do not consider the question with regard to men only, but with regard to all animals and plants, and, in short, to all things which may be said to have birth.
Let us see with regard to all these, whether it is true that they are all born or generated only from their opposites, in case they have opposites, as for instance, the noble is the opposite of the disgraceful, the just of the unjust, and there are countless other similar pairs.
Let us consider the question whether it is inevitable that everything which has an opposite be generated from its opposite and from it only.
For instance, when anything becomes greater it must inevitably have been smaller and then have become greater."
"Yes."
"And if it becomes smaller, it must have been greater and then have become smaller?"
"That is true," said he.
"And the weaker is generated from the stronger, and the slower from the quicker?"
"Certainly."
"And the worse from the better and the more just from the more unjust?"
"Of course."
"Then," said he, "we have this fact sufficiently established, that all things are generated in this way, opposites from opposites?"
"Certainly."
"Now then, is there between all these pairs of opposites what may be called two kinds of generation, from one to the other and back again from the other to the first?
Between a larger thing and a smaller thing there is increment and diminution and we call one increasing and the other decreasing, do we not?"
"Yes," said he.
"And similarly analyzing and combining, and cooling and heating, and all opposites in the same way.
Even if we do not in every case have the words to express it, yet in fact is it not always inevitable that there is a process of generation from each to the other?"
"Certainly," said he.
"Well then," said Socrates, "is there anything that is the opposite of living, as being awake is the opposite of sleeping?"
"Certainly," said Cebes.
"What?"
"Being dead," said he.
"Then these two are generated from each other, and as they are two, so the processes between them are two; is it not so?"
"Of course."
"Now," said Socrates, "I will tell about one of the two pairs of which I just spoke to you and its intermediate processes; and do you tell me about the other.
I say one term is sleeping and the other is being awake, and being awake is generated from sleeping, and sleeping from being awake, and the processes of generation are, in the latter case, falling asleep, and in the former, waking up.
Do you agree, or not?"
"Certainly."
"Now do you," said he, "tell me in this way about life and death.
Do you not say that living is the opposite of being dead?"
"I do."
"And that they are generated one from the other?"
"Yes."
"Now what is it which is generated from the living?"
"The dead," said he.
"And what," said Socrates, "from the dead?"
"I can say only one thing the living."
"From the dead, then, Cebes, the living, both things and persons, are generated?"
"Evidently," said he.
"Then," said Socrates, "our souls exist in the other world."
"So it seems."
"And of the two processes of generation between these two, the one is plain to be seen;
for surely dying is plain to be seen, is it not?"
"Certainly," said he.
"Well then," said Socrates, "what shall we do next?
Shall we deny the opposite process, and shall nature be one-sided in this instance?
Or must we grant that there is some process of generation the opposite of dying?"
"Certainly we must," said he.
"What is this process?''
"Coming to life again."
"Then," said Socrates, "if there be such a thing as coming to life again, this would be the process of generation from the dead to the living?"
"Certainly."
"So by this method also we reach the conclusion that the living are generated from the dead, just as much as the dead from the living; and since this is the case, it seems to me to be a sufficient proof that the souls of the dead exist somewhere, whence they come back to life."
"I think, Socrates, that results necessarily from our previous admissions."
"Now here is another method, Cebes, to prove, as it seems to me, that we were right in making those admissions.
For if generation did not proceed from opposite to opposite and back again, going round, as it were in a circle, but always went forward in a straight line without turning back or curving, then, you know, in the end all things would have the same form and be acted upon in the same way and stop being generated at all."
"What do you mean?"
said he.
"It is not at all hard," said Socrates, "to understand what I mean.
For example, if the process of falling asleep existed, but not the opposite process of waking from sleep, in the end, you know, that would make the sleeping Endymion mere nonsense; he would be nowhere, for everything else would be in the same state as he, sound asleep.
Or if all thing were mixed together and never separated, the saying of Anaxagoras, all things are chaos, would soon come true.
And in like manner, my dear Cebes, if all things that have life should die, and, when they had died, the dead should remain in that condition, is it not inevitable that at last all things would be dead and nothing alive?
For if the living were generated from any other things than from the dead, and the living were to die, is there any escape from the final result that all things would be swallowed up in death?"
"I see none, Socrates," said Cebes. "What you say seems to be perfectly true."
"I think, Cebes," said he, "it is absolutely so, and we are not deluded in making these admissions, but the return to life is an actual fact, and it is a fact that the living are generated from the dead and that the souls of the dead exist."
"And besides," Cebes rejoined, "if it is true, Socrates, as you are fond of saying, that our learning is nothing else than recollection, then this would be an additional argument that we must necessarily have learned in some previous time what we now remember.
But this is impossible if our soul did not exist somewhere before being born in this human form; and so by this argument also it appears that the soul is immortal."
"But, Cebes," said Simmias, "what were the proofs of this?
Remind me; for I do not recollect very well just now."
"Briefly," said Cebes, "a very good proof is this: When people are questioned, if you put the questions well, they answer correctly of themselves about everything; and yet if they had not within them some knowledge and right reason, they could not do this.
And that this is so is shown most clearly if you take them to mathematical diagrams or anything of that sort."
"And if you are not convinced in that way, Simmias," said Socrates, "see if you don't agree when you look at it in this way.
You are incredulous, are you not, how that which is called learning can be recollection?"
"I am not incredulous," said Simmias, "but I want just what we are talking about, recollection.
And from what Cebes undertook to say I already begin to recollect and be convinced; nevertheless, I should like to hear what you were going to say."
"It was this," said he.
"We agree, I suppose, that if anyone is to remember anything, he must know it at some previous time?"
"Certainly," said he.
"Then do we agree to this also, that when knowledge comes in such a way, it is recollection?
If a man, when he has heard or seen or in any other way perceived a thing, knows not only that thing, but also has a perception of some other thing, the knowledge of which is not the same, but different, are we not right in saying that he recollects the thing of which he has the perception?"
"What do you mean?"
"Let me give an example.
Knowledge of a man is different from knowledge of a lyre."
"Of course."
"Well, you know that a lover when he sees a lyre or a cloak or anything else which his beloved is wont to use, perceives the lyre and in his mind receives an image of the boy to whom the lyre belongs, do you not?
But this is recollection, just as when one sees Simmias, one often remembers Cebes, and I could cite countless such examples."
"To be sure you could," said Simmias.
"Now," said he, "is that sort of thing a kind of recollection?
Especially when it takes place with regard to things which have already been forgotten through time and inattention?"
"Certainly," he replied.
"Well, then," said Socrates, "can a person on seeing a picture of a horse or of a lyre be reminded of a man, or on seeing a picture of Simmias be reminded of Cebes?"
"Surely."
"And on seeing a picture of Simmias he can be reminded of Simmias himself?"
"Yes," said he.
"All these examples show, then, that recollection is caused by like things and also by unlike things, do they not?"
"Yes."
"And when one has a recollection of anything caused by like things, will he not also inevitably consider whether this recollection offers a perfect likeness of the thing recollected, or not?"
"Inevitably," he replied.
"Now see," said he, "if this is true.
We say there is such a thing as equality.
I do not mean one piece of wood equal to another, or one stone to another, or anything of that sort, but something beyond that equality in the abstract.
Shall we say there is such a thing, or not?"
"We shall say that there is," said Simmias, "most decidedly."
"And do we know what it is?"
"Certainly," said he.
"Whence did we derive the knowledge of it?
Is it not from the things we were just speaking of?
Did we not, by seeing equal pieces of wood or stones or other things, derive from them a knowledge of abstract equality, which is another thing?
Or do you not think it is another thing?
Look at the matter in this way.
Do not equal stones and pieces of wood, though they remain the same, sometimes appear to us equal in one respect and unequal in another?"
"Certainly."
"Well, then, did absolute equals ever appear to you unequal or equality inequality?"
"No, Socrates, never."
"Then," said he, "those equals are not the same as equality in the abstract."
"Not at all, I should say, Socrates."
"But from those equals," said he, "which are not the same as abstract equality, you have nevertheless conceived and acquired knowledge of it?"
"Very true," he replied.
"And it is either like them or unlike them?"
"Certainly."
"It makes no difference," said he.
"Whenever the sight of one thing brings you a perception of another, whether they be like or unlike, that must necessarily be recollection."
"Surely."
"Now then," said he, "do the equal pieces of wood and the equal things of which we were speaking just now affect us in this way:
Do they seem to us to be equal as abstract equality is equal, or do they somehow fall short of being like abstract equality?"
"They fall very far short of it," said he.
"Do we agree, then, that when anyone on seeing a thing thinks, 'This thing that I see aims at being like some other thing that exists, but falls short and is unable to be like that thing, but is inferior to it, he who thinks thus must of necessity have previous knowledge of the thing which he says the other resembles but falls short of?"
"We must."
"Well then, is this just what happened to us with regard to the equal things and equality in the abstract?"
"It certainly is."
"Then we must have had knowledge of equality before the time when we first saw equal things and thought, 'All these things are aiming to be like equality but fall short.'"
"That is true."
"And we agree, also, that we have not gained knowledge of it, and that it is impossible to gain this knowledge, except by sight or touch or some other of the senses?"
"Yes, Socrates, they are all alike, for the purposes of our argument."
"Then it is through the senses that we must learn that all sensible objects strive after absolute equality and fall short of it.
Is that our view?"
"Yes."
"Then before we began to see or hear or use the other senses we must somewhere have gained a knowledge of abstract or absolute equality, if we were to compare with it the equals which we perceive by the senses, and see that all such things yearn to be like abstract equality but fall short of it."
"That follows necessarily from what we have said before, Socrates."
"And we saw and heard and had the other senses as soon as we were born?"
"Certainly."
"But, we say, we must have acquired a knowledge of equality before we had these senses?"
"Yes.
"Then it appears that we must have acquired it before we were born."
"It does."
"Now if we had acquired that knowledge before we were born, and were born with it, we knew before we were born and at the moment of birth not only the equal and the greater and the less, but all such abstractions?
For our present argument is no more concerned with the equal than with absolute beauty and the absolute good and the just and the holy, and, in short, with all those things which we stamp with the seal of absolute in our dialectic process of questions and answers;
so that we must necessarily have acquired knowledge of all these before our birth."
"That is true."
"And if after acquiring it we have not, in each case, forgotten it, we must always be born knowing these things, and must know them throughout our life; for to know is to have acquired knowledge and to have retained it without losing it, and the loss of knowledge is just what we mean when we speak of forgetting, is it not, Simmias?"
"Certainly, Socrates," said he.
"But, I suppose, if we acquired knowledge before we were born and lost it at birth, but afterwards by the use of our senses regained the knowledge which we had previously possessed, would not the process which we call learning really be recovering knowledge which is our own?
And should we be right in calling this recollection?"
"Assuredly."
"For we found that it is possible, on perceiving a thing by the sight or the hearing or any other sense, to call to mind from that perception another thing which had been forgotten, which was associated with the thing perceived, whether like it or unlike it; so that, as I said, one of two things is true, either we are all born knowing these things and know them all our lives, or afterwards, those who are said to learn merely remember, and learning would then be recollection."
"That is certainly true, Socrates."
"Which then do you choose, Simmias?
Were we born with the knowledge, or do we recollect afterwards things of which we had acquired knowledge before our birth?"
"I cannot choose at this moment, Socrates."
"How about this question?
You can choose and you have some opinion about it: When a man knows, can he give an account of what he knows or not?"
"Certainly he can, Socrates."
"And do you think that everybody can give an account of the matters about which we have just been talking?"
"I wish they might," said Simmias; "but on the contrary I fear that tomorrow, at this time, there will be no longer any man living who is able to do so properly."
"Then, Simmias, you do not think all men know these things?"
"By no means."
"Then they recollect the things they once learned?"
"Necessarily."
"When did our souls acquire the knowledge of them?
Surely not after we were born as human beings."
"Certainly not."
"Then previously."
"Yes."
"Then, Simmias, the souls existed previously, before they were in human form, apart from bodies, and they had intelligence."
"Unless, Socrates, we acquire these ideas at the moment of birth; for that time still remains."
"Very well, my friend.
But at what other time do we lose them?
For we are surely not born with them, as we just now agreed.
Do we lose them at the moment when we receive them?
Or have you some other time to suggest?"
"None whatever, Socrates.
I did not notice that I was talking nonsense."
"Then, Simmias," said he, "is this the state of the case?
If, as we are always saying, the beautiful exists, and the good, and every essence of that kind, and if we refer all our sensations to these, which we find existed previously and are now ours, and compare our sensations with these, is it not a necessary inference that just as these abstractions exist, so our souls existed before we were born; and if these abstractions do not exist, our argument is of no force?
Is this the case, and is it equally certain that provided these things exist our souls also existed before we were born, and that if these do not exist, neither did our souls?"
"Socrates, it seems to me that there is absolutely the same certainty, and our argument comes to the excellent conclusion that our soul existed before we were born, and that the essence of which you speak likewise exists.
For there is nothing so clear to me as this, that all such things, the beautiful, the good, and all the others of which you were speaking just now, have a most real existence.
And I think the proof is sufficient."
"But how about Cebes?"
said Socrates.
"For Cebes must be convinced, too."
"He is fully convinced, I think," said Simmias; "and yet he is the most obstinately incredulous of mortals.
Still, I believe he is quite convinced of this, that our soul existed before we were born.
However, that it will still exist after we die does not seem even to me to have been proved, Socrates, but the common fear, which Cebes mentioned just now, that when a man dies the soul is dispersed and this is the end of his existence, still remains.
For assuming that the soul comes into being and is brought together from some source or other and exists before it enters into a human body, what prevents it, after it has entered into and left that body, from coming to an end and being destroyed itself?"
"You are right, Simmias," said Cebes.
"It seems to me that we have proved only half of what is required, namely, that our soul existed before our birth.
But we must also show that it exists after we are dead as well as before our birth, if the proof is to be perfect."
"It has been shown, Simmias and Cebes, already," said Socrates, "if you will combine this conclusion with the one we reached before, that every living being is born from the dead.
For if the soul exists before birth, and, when it comes into life and is born, cannot be born from anything else than death and a state of death, must it not also exist after dying, since it must be born again?
So the proof you call for has already been given.
However, I think you and Simmias would like to carry on this discussion still further.
You have the childish fear that when the soul goes out from the body the wind will really blow it away and scatter it, especially if a man happens to die in a high wind and not in calm weather."
And Cebes laughed and said, "Assume that we have that fear, Socrates, and try to convince us; or rather, do not assume that we are afraid, but perhaps there is a child within us, who has such fears.
Let us try to persuade him not to fear death as if it were a hobgoblin."
"Ah," said Socrates, "you must sing charms to him every day until you charm away his fear."
"Where then, Socrates," said he, "shall we find a good singer of such charms, since you are leaving us?''
"Hellas, Cebes," he replied, "is a large country, in which there are many good men, and there are many foreign peoples also.
You ought to search through all of them in quest of such a charmer, sparing neither money nor toil, for there is no greater need for which you could spend your money.
And you must seek among yourselves, too, for perhaps you would hardly find others better able to do this than you."
"That," said Cebes, "shall be done.
But let us return to the point where we left off, if you are willing."
"Oh, I am willing, of course."
"Good," said he.
"Well then," said Socrates, "must we not ask ourselves some such question as this?
What kind of thing naturally suffers dispersion, and for what kind of thing might we naturally fear it, and again what kind of thing is not liable to it?
And after this must we not inquire to which class the soul belongs and base our hopes or fears for our souls upon the answers to these questions?"
"You are quite right," he replied.
"Now is not that which is compounded and composite naturally liable to be decomposed, in the same way in which it was compounded?
And if anything is uncompounded is not that, if anything, naturally unlikely to be decomposed?"
"I think," said Cebes, "that is true."
"Then it is most probable that things which are always the same and unchanging are the uncompounded things and the things that are changing and never the same are the composite things?"
"Yes, I think so."
"Let us then," said he, "turn to what we were discussing before.
Is the absolute essence, which we in our dialectic process of question and answer call true being, always the same or is it liable to change?
Absolute equality, absolute beauty, any absolute existence, true being do they ever admit of any change whatsoever?
Or does each absolute essence, since it is uniform and exists by itself, remain the same and never in any way admit of any change?"
"It must," said Cebes, "necessarily remain the same, Socrates."
"But how about the many things, for example, men, or horses, or cloaks, or any other such things, which bear the same names as the absolute essences and are called beautiful or equal or the like?
Or are they, in direct opposition to the essences, constantly changing in themselves, unlike each other, and, so to speak, never the same?"
"The latter," said Cebes; "they are never the same."
"And you can see these and touch them and perceive them by the other senses, whereas the things which are always the same can be grasped only by the reason, and are invisible and not to be seen?"
"Certainly," said he, "that is true."
"Now," said he, "shall we assume two kinds of existences, one visible, the other invisible?"
"Let us assume them," said Cebes.
"And that the invisible is always the same and the visible constantly changing?"
"Let us assume that also," said he.
"Well then," said Socrates, "are we not made up of two parts, body and soul?"
"Yes," he replied.
"Now to which class should we say the body is more similar and more closely akin?"
"To the visible," said he; "that is clear to everyone."
"And the soul?
Is it visible or invisible?"
"Invisible, to man, at least, Socrates."
"But we call things visible and invisible with reference to human vision, do we not?"
"Yes, we do."
"Then what do we say about the soul?
Can it be seen or not?"
"It cannot be seen."
"Then it is invisible?"
"Yes."
"Then the soul is more like the invisible than the body is, and the body more like the visible."
"Necessarily, Socrates."
"Now we have also been saying for a long time, have we not, that, when the soul makes use of the body for any inquiry, either through seeing or hearing or any of the other senses for inquiry through the body means inquiry through the senses, then it is dragged by the body to things which never remain the same, and it wanders about and is confused and dizzy like a drunken man because it lays hold upon such things?"
"Certainly."
"But when the soul inquires alone by itself, it departs into the realm of the pure, the everlasting, the immortal and the changeless, and being akin to these it dwells always with them whenever it is by itself and is not hindered, and it has rest from its wanderings and remains always the same and unchanging with the changeless, since it is in communion therewith.
And this state of the soul is called wisdom."
"Socrates," said he, "what you say is perfectly right and true."
"And now again, in view of what we said before and of what has just been said, to which class do you think the soul has greater likeness and kinship?"
"I think, Socrates," said he, "that anyone, even the dullest, would agree, after this argument that the soul is infinitely more like that which is always the same than that which is not."
"And the body?"
"Is more like the other."
"Consider, then, the matter in another way, when the soul and the body are joined together, nature directs the one to serve and be ruled, and the other to rule and be master.
Now this being the case, which seems to you like the divine, and which like the mortal?
Or do you not think that the divine is by nature fitted to rule and lead, and the mortal to obey and serve?"
"Yes, I think so."
"Which, then, does the soul resemble?"
"Clearly, Socrates, the soul is like the divine and the body like the mortal."
"Then see, Cebes, if this is not the conclusion from all that we have said, that the soul is most like the divine and immortal and intellectual and uniform and indissoluble and ever unchanging, and the body, on the contrary, most like the human and mortal and multiform and unintellectual and dissoluble and ever changing.
Can we say anything, my dear Cebes, to show that this is not so?"
"No, we cannot."
"Well then, since this is the case, is it not natural for the body to meet with speedy dissolution and for the soul, on the contrary, to be entirely indissoluble, or nearly so?"
"Of course."
"Observe," he went on, "that when a man dies, the visible part of him, the body, which lies in the visible world and which we call the corpse, which is naturally subject to dissolution and decomposition, does not undergo these processes at once, but remains for a considerable time, and even for a very long time, if death takes place when the body is in good condition, and at a favorable time of the year.
For when the body is shrunk and embalmed, as is done in Egypt, it remains almost entire for an incalculable time.
And even if the body decay, some parts of it, such as the bones and sinews and all that, are, so to speak, indestructible.
Is not that true?"
"Yes."
"But the soul, the invisible, which departs into another place which is, like itself, noble and pure and invisible, to the realm of the god of the other world in truth, to the good and wise god, whither, if God will, my soul is soon to go, is this soul, which has such qualities and such a nature, straightway scattered and destroyed when it departs from the body, as most men say?
Far from it, dear Cebes and Simmias, but the truth is much rather this if it departs pure, dragging with it nothing of the body, because it never willingly associated with the body in life, but avoided it and gathered itself into itself alone, since this has always been its constant study but this means nothing else than that it pursued philosophy rightly and really practiced being in a state of death: or is not this the practice of death?"
"By all means."
"Then if it is in such a condition, it goes away into that which is like itself, into the invisible, divine, immortal, and wise, and when it arrives there it is happy, freed from error and folly and fear and fierce loves and all the other human ills, and as the initiated say, lives in truth through all after time with the gods.
Is this our belief, Cebes, or not?"
"Assuredly," said Cebes.
"But, I think, if when it departs from the body it is defiled and impure, because it was always with the body and cared for it and loved it and was fascinated by it and its desires and pleasures, so that it thought nothing was true except the corporeal, which one can touch and see and drink and eat and employ in the pleasures of love, and if it is accustomed to hate and fear and avoid that which is shadowy and invisible to the eyes but is intelligible and tangible to philosophy do you think a soul in this condition will depart pure and uncontaminated?"
"By no means," said he.
"But it will be interpenetrated, I suppose, with the corporeal which intercourse and communion with the body have made a part of its nature because the body has been its constant companion and the object of its care?"
"Certainly."
"And, my friend, we must believe that the corporeal is burdensome and heavy and earthly and visible.
And such a soul is weighed down by this and is dragged back into the visible world, through fear of the invisible and of the other world, and so, as they say, it flits about the monuments and the tombs, where shadowy shapes of souls have been seen, figures of those souls which were not set free in purity but retain something of the visible; and this is why they are seen."
"That is likely, Socrates."
"It is likely, Cebes.
And it is likely that those are not the souls of the good, but those of the base, which are compelled to flit about such places as a punishment for their former evil mode of life.
And they flit about until through the desire of the corporeal which clings to them they are again imprisoned in a body.
And they are likely to be imprisoned in natures which correspond to the practices of their former life."
"What natures do you mean, Socrates?"
"I mean, for example, that those who have indulged in gluttony and violence and drunkenness, and have taken no pains to avoid them, are likely to pass into the bodies of asses and other beasts of that sort.
Do you not think so?"
"Certainly that is very likely."
"And those who have chosen injustice and tyranny and robbery pass into the bodies of wolves and hawks and kites.
Where else can we imagine that they go?"
"Beyond a doubt," said Cebes, "they pass into such creatures."
"Then," said he, "it is clear where all the others go, each in accordance with its own habits?"
"Yes," said Cebes, "of course."
"Then," said he, "the happiest of those, and those who go to the best place, are those who have practiced, by nature and habit, without philosophy or reason, the social and civil virtues which are called moderation and justice?"
"How are these happiest?"
"Is it not likely that they pass again into some such social and gentle species as that of bees or of wasps or ants, or into the human race again, and that worthy men spring from them?"
"Yes."
"And no one who has not been a philosopher and who is not wholly pure when he departs, is allowed to enter into the communion of the gods, but only the lover of knowledge.
It is for this reason, dear Simmias and Cebes, that those who truly love wisdom refrain from all bodily desires and resist them firmly and do not give themselves up to them, not because they fear poverty or loss of property, as most men, in their love of money, do; nor is it because they fear the dishonor or disgrace of wickedness, like the lovers of honor and power, that they refrain from them."
"No, that would not be seemly for them, Socrates," said Cebes.
"Most assuredly not," said he.
"And therefore those who care for their own souls, and do not live in service to the body, turn their backs upon all these men and do not walk in their ways, for they feel that they know not whither they are going.
They themselves believe that philosophy, with its deliverance and purification, must not be resisted, and so they turn and follow it whithersoever it leads."
"How do they do this, Socrates?"
"I will tell you," he replied.
"The lovers of knowledge," said he, "perceive that when philosophy first takes possession of their soul it is entirely fastened and welded to the body and is compelled to regard realities through the body as through prison bars, not with its own unhindered vision, and is wallowing in utter ignorance.
And it sees that the most dreadful thing about the imprisonment is the fact that it is caused by the lusts of the flesh, so that the prisoner is the chief assistant in his own imprisonment.
The lovers of knowledge, then, I say, perceive that philosophy, taking possession of the soul when it is in this state, encourages it gently and tries to set it free, pointing out that the eyes and the ears and the other senses are full of deceit, and urging it to withdraw from these, except in so far as their use is unavoidable, and exhorting it to collect and concentrate itself within itself, and to trust nothing except itself and its own abstract thought of abstract existence;
and to believe that there is no truth in that which it sees by other means and which varies with the various objects in which it appears, since everything of that kind is visible and apprehended by the senses, whereas the soul itself sees that which is invisible and apprehended by the mind.
Now the soul of the true philosopher believes that it must not resist this deliverance, and therefore it stands aloof from pleasures and lusts and griefs and fears, so far as it can, considering that when anyone has violent pleasures or fears or griefs or lusts he suffers from them not merely what one might think for example, illness or loss of money spent for his lusts but he suffers the greatest and most extreme evil and does not take it into account."
"What is this evil, Socrates?"
said Cebes.
"The evil is that the soul of every man, when it is greatly pleased or pained by anything, is compelled to believe that the object which caused the emotion is very distinct and very true; but it is not.
These objects are mostly the visible ones, are they not?"
"Certainly."
"And when this occurs, is not the soul most completely put in bondage by the body?"
"How so?"
"Because each pleasure or pain nails it as with a nail to the body and rivets it on and makes it corporeal, so that it fancies the things are true which the body says are true.
For because it has the same beliefs and pleasures as the body it is compelled to adopt also the same habits and mode of life, and can never depart in purity to the other world, but must always go away contaminated with the body;
and so it sinks quickly into another body again and grows into it, like seed that is sown.
Therefore it has no part in the communion with the divine and pure and absolute."
"What you say, Socrates, is very true," said Cebes.
"This, Cebes, is the reason why the true lovers of knowledge are temperate and brave; not the world's reason.
Or do you disagree?"
"Certainly not."
"No, for the soul of the philosopher would not reason as others do, and would not think it right that philosophy should set it free, and that then when set free it should give itself again into bondage to pleasure and pain and engage in futile toil, like Penelope unweaving the web she wove.
but that it must gain peace from these emotions, must follow reason and abide always in it, beholding that which is true and divine and not a matter of opinion, and making that its only food; and in this way it believes it must live, while life endures, and then at death pass on to that which is akin to itself and of like nature, and be free from human ills.
A soul which has been nurtured in this way, Simmias and Cebes, is not likely to fear that it will be torn asunder at its departure from the body and will vanish into nothingness, blown apart by the winds, and be no longer anywhere."
When Socrates had said this there was silence for a long time, and Socrates himself was apparently absorbed in what had been said, as were also most of us.
But Simmias and Cebes conversed a little with each other;
and Socrates saw them and said:
"Do you think there is any incompleteness in what has been said?
There are still many subjects for doubt and many points open to attack, if anyone cares to discuss the matter thoroughly.
If you are considering anything else, I have nothing to say; but if you are in any difficulty about these matters, do not hesitate to speak and discuss them yourselves, if you think anything better could be said on the subject, and to take me along with you in the discussion, if you think you can get on better in my company."
And Simmias said: "Socrates, I will tell you the truth.
For some time each of us has been in doubt and has been egging the other on and urging him to ask a question, because we wish to hear your answer, but hesitate to trouble you, for fear that it may be disagreeable to you in your present misfortune."
And when he heard is, he laughed gently and said: "Ah, Simmias!
I should have hard work to persuade other people that I do not regard my present situation as a misfortune, when I cannot even make you believe it, but you are afraid I am more churlish now than I used to be.
And you seem to think I am inferior in prophetic power to the swans who sing at other times also, but when they feel that they are to die, sing most and best in their joy that they are to go to the god whose servants they are.
But men, because of their own fear of death, misrepresent the swans and say that they sing for sorrow, in mourning for their own death.
They do not consider that no bird sings when it is hungry or cold or has any other trouble; no, not even the nightingale or the swallow or the hoopoe which are said to sing in lamentation.
I do not believe they sing for grief, nor do the swans; but since they are Apollo's birds, I believe they have prophetic vision, and because they have foreknowledge of the blessings in the other world they sing and rejoice on that day more than ever before.
And I think that I am myself a fellow-servant of the swans; and am consecrated to the same God and have received from our master a gift of prophecy no whit inferior to theirs, and that I go out from life with as little sorrow as they.
So far as this is concerned, then, speak and ask what ever questions you please, so long as the eleven of the Athenians permit."
"Good," said Simmias.
"I will tell you my difficulty, and then Cebes in turn will say why he does not agree to all you have said.
I think, Socrates, as perhaps you do yourself, that it is either impossible or very difficult to acquire clear knowledge about these matters in this life.
And yet he is a weakling who does not test in every way what is said about them and persevere until he is worn out by studying them on every side.
For he must do one of two things; either he must learn or discover the truth about these matters, or if that is impossible, he must take whatever human doctrine is best and hardest to disprove and, embarking upon it as upon a raft, sail upon it through life in the midst of dangers, unless he can sail upon some stronger vessel, some divine revelation, and make his voyage more safely and securely.
And so now I am not ashamed to ask questions, since you encourage me to do so, and I shall not have to blame myself hereafter for not saying now what I think.
For, Socrates, when I examine what has been said to myself, it does not seem quite satisfactory."
And Socrates replied: "Perhaps, my friend, you are right.
But tell me in what respect it is not satisfactory."
"In this," said he, "that one might use the same argument about harmony and a lyre with its strings.
Once might say that the harmony is invisible and incorporeal, and very beautiful and divine in the well attuned lyre, but the lyre itself and its strings are bodies, and corporeal and composite and earthy and akin to that which is mortal.
Now if someone shatters the lyre or cuts and breaks the strings, what if he should maintain by the same argument you employed, that the harmony could not have perished and must still exist?
For there would be no possibility that the lyre and its strings, which are of mortal nature, still exist after the strings are broken, and the harmony, which is related and akin to the divine and the immortal, perish before that which is mortal.
He would say that the harmony must still exist somewhere, and that the wood and the strings must rot away before anything could happen to it.
And I fancy, Socrates, that it must have occurred to your own mind that we believe the soul to be something after this fashion; that our body is strung and held together by heat, cold, moisture, dryness, and the like, and the soul is a mixture and a harmony of these same elements, when they are well and properly mixed.
Now if the soul is a harmony, it is clear that when the body is too much relaxed or is too tightly strung by diseases or other ills, the soul must of necessity perish, no matter how divine it is,
like other harmonies in sounds and in all the works of artists, and the remains of each body will endure a long time until they are burnt or decayed.
Now what shall we say to this argument, if anyone claims that the soul, being a mixture of the elements of the body, is the first to perish in what is called death?"
Then Socrates, looking keenly at us, as he often used to do, smiled and said: "Simmias raises a fair objection.
Now if any of you is readier than I, why does he not reply to him?
For he seems to score a good point.
However, I think before replying to him we ought to hear what fault our friend Cebes finds with our argument, that we may take time to consider what to say, and then when we have heard them, we can either agree with them, if they seem to strike the proper note, or, if they do not, we can proceed to argue in defence of our reasoning.
Come, Cebes," said he, "tell us what it was that troubled you."
"Well, I will tell you," said Cebes.
"The argument seems to me to be just where it was, and to be still open to the objection I made before.
For I do not deny that it has been very cleverly, and, if I may say so, conclusively shown that the soul existed before it entered into this bodily form, but it does not seem to me proved that it will still exist when we are dead.
I do not agree with Simmias' objection, that the soul is not stronger and more lasting than the body, for I think it is far superior in all such respects.
'Why then,' the argument might say, 'do you still disbelieve, when you see that after a man dies the weaker part still exists?
Do you not think the stronger part must necessarily be preserved during the same length of time?'
Now see if my reply to this has any sense.
I think I may, like Simmias, best express myself in a figure.
It seems to me that it is much as if one should say about an old weaver who had died, that the man had not perished but was safe and sound somewhere, and should offer as a proof of this the fact that the cloak which the man had woven and used to wear was still whole and had not perished.
Then if anyone did not believe him, he would ask which lasts longer, a man or a cloak that is in use and wear, and when the answer was given that a man lasts much longer, he would think it had been proved beyond a doubt that the man was safe, because that which was less lasting had not perished.
"But I do not think he is right, Simmias, and I ask you especially to notice what I say.
Anyone can understand that a man who says this is talking nonsense.
For the weaver in question wove and wore out many such cloaks and lasted longer than they, though they were many, but perished, I suppose, before the last one.
Yet a man is not feebler or weaker than a cloak on that account at all.
And I think the same figure would apply to the soul and the body and it would be quite appropriate to say in like manner about them, that the soul lasts a long time, but the body lasts a shorter time and is weaker.
And, one might go on to say that each soul wears out many bodies, especially if the man lives many years.
For if the body is constantly changing and being destroyed while the man still lives, and the soul is always weaving anew that which wears out, then when the soul perishes it must necessarily have on its last garment, and this only will survive it, and when the soul has perished, then the body will at once show its natural weakness and will quickly disappear in decay.
And so we are not yet justified in feeling sure, on the strength of this argument, that our souls will still exist somewhere after we are dead.
For if one were to grant even more to a man who uses your argument and allow not only that our souls existed before we were born, but also that there is nothing to prevent some of them from continuing to exist and from being born and dying again many times after we are dead, because the soul is naturally so strong that it can endure repeated births,
even allowing this, one might not grant that it does not suffer by its many births and does not finally perish altogether in one of its deaths.
But he might say that no one knows beforehand the particular death and the particular dissolution of the body which brings destruction to the soul, for none of us can perceive that.
Now if this is the case, anyone who feels confident about death has a foolish confidence, unless he can show that the soul is altogether immortal and imperishable.
Otherwise a man who is about to die must always fear that his soul will perish utterly in the impending dissolution of the body."
Now all of us, as we remarked to one another afterwards, were very uncomfortable when we heard what they said; for we had been thoroughly convinced by the previous argument, and now they seemed to be throwing us again into confusion and distrust, not only in respect to the past discussion but also with regard to any future one.
They made us fear that our judgment was worthless or that no certainty could be attained in these matters.
Echecrates
By the gods, Phaedo, I sympathize with you;
for I myself after listening to you am inclined to ask myself: "What argument shall we believe henceforth?
For the argument of Socrates was perfectly convincing, and now it has fallen into discredit."
For the doctrine that the soul is a kind of harmony has always had (and has now) a wonderful hold upon me, and your mention of it reminded me that I had myself believed in it before.
Now I must begin over again and find another argument to convince me that when a man dies his soul does not perish with him.
So, for heaven's sake, tell how Socrates continued the discourse,
and whether he also, as you say the rest of you did, showed any uneasiness, or calmly defended his argument.
And did he defend it successfully?
Tell us everything as accurately as you can.
Phaedo
Echecrates, I have often wondered at Socrates, but never did I admire him more than then.
That he had an answer ready was perhaps to be expected; but what astonished me more about him was, first, the pleasant, gentle, and respectful manner in which he listened to the young men's criticisms, secondly, his quick sense of the effect their words had upon us, and lastly, the skill with which he cured us and, as it were, recalled us from our flight and defeat and made us face about and follow him and join in his examination of the argument.
Echecrates
How did he do it?
Phaedo
I will tell you.
I was sitting at his right hand on a low stool beside his couch, and his seat was a good deal higher than mine.
He stroked my head and gathered the hair on the back of my neck into his hand he had a habit of playing with my hair on occasion and said, "Tomorrow, perhaps, Phaedo, you will cut off this beautiful hair."
"I suppose so, Socrates," said I.
"Not if you take my advice."
"What shall I do then?"
I asked.
"You will cut it off today, and I will cut mine, if our argument dies and we cannot bring it to life again.
If I were you and the argument escaped me, I would take an oath, like the Argives, not to let my hair grow until I had renewed the fight and won a victory over the argument of Simmias and Cebes."
"But," I replied, "they say that even Heracles is not a match for two."
"Well," said he, "call me to help you, as your Iolaus, while there is still light."
"I call you to help, then," said I, "not as Heracles calling Iolaus, but as Iolaus calling Heracles."
"That is all one," said he.
"But first let us guard against a danger."
"Of what sort?"
I asked.
"The danger of becoming misologists or haters of argument," said he, "as people become misanthropists or haters of man; for no worse evil can happen to a man than to hate argument.
Misology and misanthropy arise from similar causes.
For misanthropy arises from trusting someone implicitly without sufficient knowledge.
You think the man is perfectly true and sound and trustworthy, and afterwards you find him base and false.
Then you have the same experience with another person.
By the time this has happened to a man a good many times, especially if it happens among those whom he might regard as his nearest and dearest friends, he ends by being in continual quarrels and by hating everybody and thinking there is nothing sound in anyone at all.
Have you not noticed this?"
"Certainly," said I.
"Well," he went on, "is it not disgraceful, and is it not plain that such a man undertakes to consort with men when he has no knowledge of human nature?
For if he had knowledge when he dealt with them, he would think that the good and the bad are both very few and those between the two are very many, for that is the case."
"What do you mean?" I said.
"I mean just what I might say about the large and small.
Do you think there is anything more unusual than to find a very large or a very small man, or dog, or other creature, or again, one that is very quick or slow, very ugly or beautiful, very black or white?
Have you not noticed that the extremes in all these instances are rare and few, and the examples between the extremes are very many?"
"To be sure," said I.
"And don't you think," said he, "that if there were to be a competition in rascality, those who excelled would be very few in that also?"
"Very likely," I replied.
"Yes, very likely," he said,
"But it is not in that respect that arguments are like men; I was merely following your lead in discussing that.
when a man without proper knowledge concerning arguments has confidence in the truth of an argument and afterwards thinks that it is false, whether it really is so or not, and this happens again and again;
then you know, those men especially who have spent their time in disputation come to believe that they are the wisest of men and that they alone have discovered that there is nothing sound or sure in anything, whether argument or anything else, but all things go up and down, like the tide in the Euripus, and nothing is stable for any length of time."
"Certainly," I said, "that is very true."
"Then, Phaedo," he said, "if there is any system of argument which is true and sure and can be learned, it would be a sad thing if a man, because he has met with some of those arguments which seem to be sometimes true and sometimes false, should then not blame himself or his own lack of skill, but should end, in his vexation, by throwing the blame gladly upon the arguments and should hate and revile them all the rest of his life, and be deprived of the truth and knowledge of reality."
"Yes, by Zeus," I said, "it would be sad."
"First, then," said he, "let us be on our guard against this, and let us not admit into our souls the notion that there is no soundness in arguments at all.
Let us far rather assume that we ourselves are not yet in sound condition and that we must strive manfully and eagerly to become so, you and the others for the sake of all your future life, and I because of my impending death; for I fear that I am not just now in a philosophical frame of mind as regards this particular question, but am contentious, like quite uncultured persons.
For when they argue about anything, they do not care what the truth is in the matters they are discussing, but are eager only to make their own views seem true to their hearers.
And I fancy I differ from them just now only to this extent: I shall not be eager to make what I say seem true to my hearers, except as a secondary matter, but shall be very eager to make myself believe it.
For see, my friend, how selfish my attitude is.
If what I say is true, I am the gainer by believing it;
and if there be nothing for me after death, at any rate I shall not be burdensome to my friends by my lamentations in these last moments.
And this ignorance of mine will not last, for that would be an evil, but will soon end.
So," he said, "Simmias and Cebes, I approach the argument with my mind thus prepared.
But you, if you do as I ask, will give little thought to Socrates and much more to the truth;
and if you think what I say is true, agree to it, and if not, oppose me with every argument you can muster, that I may not in my eagerness deceive myself and you alike and go away, like a bee, leaving my sting sticking in you.
"But we must get to work," he said.
"First refresh my memory, if I seem to have forgotten anything.
Simmias, I think, has doubts and fears that the soul, though more divine and excellent than the body, may perish first, being of the nature of a harmony.
And, Cebes, I believe, granted that the soul is more lasting than the body, but said that no one could know that the soul, after wearing out many bodies, did not at last perish itself upon leaving the body; and that this was death the destruction of the soul, since the body is continually being destroyed.
Are those the points, Simmias and Cebes, which we must consider?"
They both agreed that these were the points.
"Now," said he, "do you reject all of our previous arguments, or only some of them?"
"Only some of them," they replied.
"What you think," he asked, "about the argument in which we said that learning is recollection and that, since this is so, our soul must necessarily have been somewhere before it was imprisoned in the body?"
"I," said Cebes, "was wonderfully convinced by it at the time and I still believe it more firmly than any other argument."
"And I too," said Simmias, "feel just as he does, and I should be much surprised if I should ever think differently on this point."
And Socrates said: "You must, my Theban friend, think differently, if you persist in your opinion that a harmony is a compound and that the soul is a harmony made up of the elements that are strung like harpstrings in the body.
For surely you will not accept your own statement that a composite harmony existed before those things from which it had to be composed, will you?"
"Certainly not, Socrates."
"Then do you see," said he, "that this is just what you say when you assert that the soul exists before it enters into the form and body of a man, and that it is composed of things that do not yet exist?
For harmony is not what your comparison assumes it to be.
The lyre and the strings and the sounds come into being in a tuneless condition, and the harmony is the last of all to be composed and the first to perish.
So how can you bring this theory into harmony with the other?"
"I cannot at all," said Simmias.
"And yet," said Socrates, "there ought to be harmony between it and the theory about harmony above all others."
"Yes, there ought," said Simmias.
Now which do you prefer, that knowledge is recollection or that the soul is a harmony?"
"The former, decidedly, Socrates," he replied.
"For this other came to me without demonstration; it merely seemed probable and attractive, which is the reason why many men hold it.
I am conscious that those arguments which base their demonstrations on mere probability are deceptive, and if we are not on our guard against them they deceive us greatly, in geometry and in all other things.
But the theory of recollection and knowledge has been established by a sound course of argument.
For we agreed that our soul before it entered into the body existed just as the very essence which is called the absolute exists.
Now I am persuaded that I have accepted this essence on sufficient and right grounds.
I cannot therefore accept from myself or anyone else the statement that the soul is a harmony."
"Here is another way of looking at it, Simmias," said he.
"Do you think a harmony or any other composite thing can be in any other state than that in which the elements are of which it is composed?"
"Certainly not."
"And it can neither do nor suffer anything other than they do or suffer?"
He agreed.
"Then a harmony cannot be expected to lead the elements of which it is composed, but to follow them."
He assented.
"A harmony, then, is quite unable to move or make a sound or do anything else that is opposed to its component parts."
"Quite unable," said he.
"Well then, is not every harmony by nature a harmony according as it is harmonized?"
"I do not understand," said Simmias.
"Would it not," said Socrates, "be more completely a harmony and a greater harmony if it were harmonized more fully and to a greater extent, assuming that to be possible, and less completely a harmony and a lesser harmony if less completely harmonized and to a less extent?"
"Certainly."
"Is this true of the soul?
Is one soul even in the slightest degree more completely and to a greater extent a soul than another, or less completely and to a less extent?"
"Not in the least," said he.
"Well now," said he, "one soul is said to possess sense and virtue and to be good, and another to possess folly and wickedness and to be bad;
and is this true?"
"Yes, it is true."
"Now what will those who assume that the soul is a harmony say that these things the virtue and the wickedness in the soul are?
Will they say that this is another kind of harmony and a discord?
and that it, which is itself a harmony, has within it another harmony and that the other soul is discordant and has no other harmony within it?"
"I cannot tell," replied Simmias, "but evidently those who make that assumption would say some thing of that sort."
"But we agreed," said Socrates, "that one soul is no more or less a soul than another; and that is equivalent to an agreement that one is no more and to no greater extent, and no less and to no less extent, a harmony than another, is it not?"
"Certainly."
"And that which is no more or less a harmony, is no more or less harmonized.
Is that so?"
"Yes."
"But has that which is no more and no less harmonized any greater or any less amount of harmony, or an equal amount?"
"An equal amount."
"Then a soul, since it is neither more nor less a soul than another, is neither more nor less harmonized."
"That is so."
"And therefore can have no greater amount of discord or of harmony?"
"No."
"And therefore again one soul can have no greater amount of wickedness or virtue than another, if wickedness is discord and virtue harmony?"
"It cannot."
"Or rather, to speak exactly, Simmias, no soul will have any wickedness at all, if the soul is a harmony; for if a harmony is entirely harmony, it could have no part in discord."
"Certainly not."
"Then the soul, being entirely soul, could have no part in wickedness."
"How could it, if what we have said is right?"
"According to this argument, then, if all souls are by nature equally souls, all souls of all living creatures will be equally good."
"So it seems, Socrates," said he.
"And," said Socrates, "do you think that this is true and that our reasoning would have come to this end, if the theory that the soul is a harmony were correct?"
"Not in the least," he replied.
"Well," said Socrates, "of all the parts that make up a man, do you think any is ruler except the soul, especially if it be a wise one?"
"No, I do not."
"Does it yield to the feelings of the body or oppose them?
I mean, when the body is hot and thirsty, does not the soul oppose it and draw it away from drinking, and from eating when it is hungry, and do we not see the soul opposing the body in countless other ways?"
"Certainly."
"Did we not agree in our previous discussion that it could never, if it be a harmony, give forth a sound at variance with the tensions and relaxations and vibrations and other conditions of the elements which compose it, but that it would follow them and never lead them?"
"Yes," he replied, "we did, of course."
"Well then, do we not now find that the soul acts in exactly the opposite way, leading those elements of which it is said to consist and opposing them in almost everything through all our life, and tyrannizing over them in every way, sometimes inflicting harsh and painful punishments (those of gymnastics and medicine),
and sometimes milder ones, sometimes threatening and sometimes admonishing, in short, speaking to the desires and passions and fears as if it were distinct from them and they from it,
as Homer has shown in the Odyssey when he says of Odysseus:
Do you suppose that, when he wrote those words, he thought of the soul as a harmony which would be led by the conditions of the body, and not rather as something fitted to lead and rule them, and itself a far more divine thing than a harmony?"
"By Zeus, Socrates, the latter, I think."
"Then, my good friend, it will never do for us to say that the soul is a harmony; for we should, it seems, agree neither with Homer, the divine poet, nor with ourselves."
"That is true," said he.
"Very well," said Socrates, "Harmonia, the Theban goddess, has, it seems, been moderately gracious to us; but how, Cebes, and by what argument can we find grace in the sight of Cadmus?"
"I think," said Cebes, "you will find a way.
At any rate, you conducted this argument against harmony wonderfully and better than I expected.
For when Simmias was telling of his difficulty, I wondered if anyone could make head against his argument; so it seemed to me very remarkable that it could not withstand the first attack of your argument.
Now I should not be surprised if the argument of Cadmus met with the same fate."
"My friend," said Socrates, "do not be boastful, lest some evil eye put to rout the argument that is to come.
That, however, is in the hands of God.
Let us, in Homeric fashion, charge the foe and test the worth of what you say.
Now the sum total of what you seek is this:
You demand a proof that our soul is indestructible and immortal, if the philosopher, who is confident in the face of death and who thinks that after death he will fare better in the other world than if he had lived his life differently, is not to find his confidence senseless and foolish.
And although we show that the soul is strong and godlike and existed before we men were born as men, all this, you say, may bear witness not to immortality, but only to the fact that the soul lasts a long while, and existed somewhere an immeasurably long time before our birth, and knew and did various things;
yet it was none the more immortal for all that, but its very entrance into the human body was the beginning of its dissolution, a disease, as it were; and it lives in toil through this life and finally perishes in what we call death.
Now it makes no difference, you say, whether a soul enters into a body once or many times, so far as the fear each of us feels is concerned; for anyone, unless he is a fool, must fear, if he does not know and cannot prove that the soul is immortal.
That, Cebes, is, I think, about what you mean.
And I restate it purposely that nothing may escape us and that you may, if you wish, add or take away anything."
And Cebes said, "I do not at present wish to take anything away or to add anything.
You have expressed my meaning."
Socrates paused for some time and was absorbed in thought.
Then he said: "It is no small thing that you seek, Cebes; for the cause of generation and decay must be completely investigated.
Now I will tell you my own experience in the matter, if you wish; then if anything I say seems to you to be of any use, you can employ it for the solution of your difficulty."
"Certainly," said Cebes, "I wish to hear your experiences."
"Listen then, and I will tell you.
When I was young, Cebes, I was tremendously eager for the kind of wisdom which they call investigation of nature.
I thought it was a glorious thing to know the causes of everything, why each thing comes into being and why it perishes and why it exists; and I was always unsettling myself with such questions as these: Do heat and cold, by a sort of fermentation, bring about the organization of animals, as some people say?
Is it the blood, or air, or fire by which we think?
Or is it none of these, and does the brain furnish the sensations of hearing and sight and smell, and do memory and opinion arise from these, and does knowledge come from memory and opinion in a state of rest?
And again I tried to find out how these things perish, and I investigated the phenomena of heaven and earth until finally I made up my mind that I was by nature totally unfitted for this kind of investigation.
And I will give you a sufficient proof of this.
I was so completely blinded by these studies that I lost the knowledge that I, and others also, thought I had before; I forgot what I had formerly believed I knew about many things and even about the cause of man's growth.
For I had thought previously that it was plain to everyone that man grows through eating and drinking; for when, from the food he eats, flesh is added to his flesh and bones to his bones, and in the same way the appropriate thing is added to each of his other parts, then the small bulk becomes greater and the small man large.
That is what I used to think.
Doesn't that seem to you reasonable?"
"Yes," said Cebes.
"Now listen to this, too.
I thought I was sure enough, when I saw a tall man standing by a short one, that he was, say, taller by a head than the other, and that one horse was larger by a head than another horse; and, to mention still clearer things than those, I thought ten were more than eight because two had been added to the eight, and I thought a two-cubit rule was longer than a one-cubit rule because it exceeded it by half its length."
"And now," said Cebes, "what do you think about them?"
"By Zeus," said he, "I am far from thinking that I know the cause of any of these things, I who do not even dare to say, when one is added to one, whether the one to which the addition was made has become two, or the one which was added, or the one which was added and the one to which it was added became two by the addition of each to the other.
I think it is wonderful that when each of them was separate from the other, each was one and they were not then two, and when they were brought near each other this juxtaposition was the cause of their becoming two.
And I cannot yet believe that if one is divided, the division causes it to become two; for this is the opposite of the cause which produced two in the former case; for then two arose because one was brought near and added to another one, and now because one is removed and separated from other.
And I no longer believe that I know by this method even how one is generated or, in a word, how anything is generated or is destroyed or exists, and I no longer admit this method, but have another confused way of my own.
"Then one day I heard a man reading from a book, as he said, by Anaxagoras, that it is the mind that arranges and causes all things.
I was pleased with this theory of cause, and it seemed to me to be somehow right that the mind should be the cause of all things, and I thought, 'If this is so, the mind in arranging things arranges everything and establishes each thing as it is best for it to be.
So if anyone wishes to find the cause of the generation or destruction or existence of a particular thing, he must find out what sort of existence, or passive state of any kind, or activity is best for it.
And therefore in respect to that particular thing, and other things too, a man need examine nothing but what is best and most excellent;
for then he will necessarily know also what is inferior, since the science of both is the same.
As I considered these things I was delighted to think that I had found in Anaxagoras a teacher of the cause of things quite to my mind, and I thought he would tell me whether the earth is flat or round, and when he had told me that, would go on to explain the cause and the necessity of it, and would tell me the nature of the best and why it is best for the earth to be as it is;
and if he said the earth was in the center, he would proceed to show that it is best for it to be in the center; and I had made up my mind that if he made those things clear to me, I would no longer yearn for any other kind of cause.
And I had determined that I would find out in the same way about the sun and the moon and the other stars, their relative speed, their revolutions, and their other changes, and why the active or passive condition of each of them is for the best.
For I never imagined that, when he said they were ordered by intelligence, he would introduce any other cause for these things than that it it is best for them to be as they are.
So I thought when he assigned the cause of each thing and of all things in common he would go on and explain what is best for each and what is good for all in common.
I prized my hopes very highly, and I seized the books very eagerly and read them as fast as I could, that I might know as fast as I could about the best and the worst.
"My glorious hope, my friend, was quickly snatched away from me.
As I went on with my reading I saw that the man made no use of intelligence, and did not assign any real causes for the ordering of things, but mentioned as causes air and ether and water and many other absurdities.
And it seemed to me it was very much as if one should say that Socrates does with intelligence whatever he does, and then, in trying to give the causes of the particular thing I do, should say first that I am now sitting here because my body is composed of bones and sinews, and the bones are hard and have joints which divide them and the sinews can be contracted and relaxed and, with the flesh and the skin which contains them all, are laid about the bones;
and so, as the bones are hung loose in their ligaments, the sinews, by relaxing and contracting, make me able to bend my limbs now, and that is the cause of my sitting here with my legs bent.
Or as if in the same way he should give voice and air and hearing and countless other things of the sort as causes for our talking with each other, and should fail to mention the real causes, which are, that the Athenians decided that it was best to condemn me, and therefore I have decided that it was best for me to sit here and that it is right for me to stay and undergo whatever penalty they order.
For, by Dog, I fancy these bones and sinews of mine would have been in Megara or Boeotia long ago, carried thither by an opinion of what was best, if I did not think it was better and nobler to endure any penalty the city may inflict rather than to escape and run away.
But it is most absurd to call things of that sort causes.
If anyone were to say that I could not have done what I thought proper if I had not bones and sinews and other things that I have, he would be right.
But to say that those things are the cause of my doing what I do, and that I act with intelligence but not from the choice of what is best, would be an extremely careless way of talking.
Whoever talks in that way is unable to make a distinction and to see that in reality a cause is one thing, and the thing without which the cause could never be a cause is quite another thing.
And so it seems to me that most people, when they give the name of cause to the latter, are groping in the dark, as it were, and are giving it a name that does not belong to it.
And so one man makes the earth stay below the heavens by putting a vortex about it, and another regards the earth as a flat trough supported on a foundation of air;
but they do not look for the power which causes things to be now placed as it is best for them to be placed, nor do they think it has any divine force, but they think they can find a new Atlas more powerful and more immortal and more all-embracing than this, and in truth they give no thought to the good, which must embrace and hold together all things.
Now I would gladly be the pupil of anyone who would teach me the nature of such a cause;
but since that was denied me and I was not able to discover it myself or to learn of it from anyone else, do you wish me, Cebes," said he, "to give you an account of the way in which I have conducted my second voyage in quest of the cause?"
"I wish it with all my heart," he replied.
"After this, then," said he, "since I had given up investigating realities, I decided that I must be careful not to suffer the misfortune which happens to people who look at the sun and watch it during an eclipse.
For some of them ruin their eyes unless they look at its image in water or something of the sort.
I thought of that danger, and I was afraid my soul would be blinded if I looked at things with my eyes and tried to grasp them with any of my senses.
So I thought I must have recourse to conceptions and examine in them the truth of realities.
Now perhaps my metaphor is not quite accurate;
for I do not grant in the least that he who studies realities by means of conceptions is looking at them in images any more than he who studies them in the facts of daily life.
However, that is the way I began.
I assume in each case some principle which I consider strongest, and whatever seems to me to agree with this, whether relating to cause or to anything else, I regard as true, and whatever disagrees with it, as untrue.
But I want to tell you more clearly what I mean; for I think you do not understand now."
"Not very well, certainly," said Cebes.
"Well," said Socrates, "this is what I mean.
It is nothing new, but the same thing I have always been saying, both in our previous conversation and elsewhere.
I am going to try to explain to you the nature of that cause which I have been studying, and I will revert to those familiar subjects of ours as my point of departure and assume that there are such things as absolute beauty and good and greatness and the like.
If you grant this and agree that these exist, I believe I shall explain cause to you and shall prove that the soul is immortal."
"You may assume," said Cebes, "that I grant it, and go on."
"Then," said he, "see if you agree with me in the next step.
I think that if anything is beautiful besides absolute beauty it is beautiful for no other reason than because it partakes of absolute beauty; and this applies to everything.
Do you assent to this view of cause?"
"I do," said he.
"Now I do not yet, understand," he went on, "nor can I perceive those other ingenious causes.
If anyone tells me that what makes a thing beautiful is its lovely color, or its shape or anything else of the sort, I let all that go, for all those things confuse me, and I hold simply and plainly and perhaps foolishly to this, that nothing else makes it beautiful but the presence or communion (call it which you please) of absolute beauty, however it may have been gained; about the way in which it happens,
I make no positive statement as yet, but I do insist that beautiful things are made beautiful by beauty.
For I think this is the safest answer I can give to myself or to others, and if I cleave fast to this, I think I shall never be overthrown, and I believe it is safe for me or anyone else to give this answer, that beautiful things are beautiful through beauty.
Do you agree?"
"I do."
"And great things are great and greater things greater by greatness, and smaller things smaller by smallness?"
"Yes."
"And you would not accept the statement, if you were told that one man was greater or smaller than another by a head, but you would insist that you say only that every greater thing is greater than another by nothing else than greatness, and that it is greater by reason of greatness, and that which is smaller is smaller by nothing else than smallness and is smaller by reason of smallness.
For you would, I think, be afraid of meeting with the retort, if you said that a man was greater or smaller than another by a head, first that the greater is greater and the smaller is smaller by the same thing, and secondly, that the greater man is greater by a head, which is small, and that it is a monstrous thing that one is great by something that is small.
Would you not be afraid of this?"
And Cebes laughed and said, "Yes, I should."
"Then," he continued, "you would be afraid to say that ten is more than eight by two and that this is the reason it is more.
You would say it is more by number and by reason of number; and a two cubit measure is greater than a one-cubit measure not by half but by magnitude, would you not?
For you would have the same fear."
"Certainly," said he.
"Well, then, if one is added to one or if one is divided, you would avoid saying that the addition or the division is the cause of two?
You would exclaim loudly that you know no other way by which any thing can come into existence than by participating in the proper essence of each thing in which it participates, and therefore you accept no other cause of the existence of two than participation in duality, and things which are to be two must participate in duality,
and whatever is to be one must participate in unity, and you would pay no attention to the divisions and additions and other such subtleties, leaving those for wiser men to explain.
You would distrust your inexperience and would be afraid, as the saying goes, of your own shadow; so you would cling to that safe principle of ours and would reply as I have said.
And if anyone attacked the principle, you would pay him no attention and you would not reply to him until you had examined the consequences to see whether they agreed with one another or not;
and when you had to give an explanation of the principle, you would give it in the same way by assuming some other principle which seemed to you the best of the higher ones, and so on until you reached one which was adequate.
You would not mix things up, as disputants do, in talking about the beginning and its consequences, if you wished to discover any of the realities;
for perhaps not one of them thinks or cares in the least about these things.
They are so clever that they succeed in being well pleased with themselves even when they mix everything up;
but if you are a philosopher, I think you will do as I have said."
"That is true," said Simmias and Cebes together.
Echecrates
By Zeus, Phaedo, they were right.
It seems to me that he made those matters astonishingly clear, to anyone with even a little sense.
Phaedo
Certainly, Echecrates, and all who were there thought so, too.
Echecrates
And so do we who were not there, and are hearing about it now.
But what was said after that?
Phaedo
As I remember it, after all this had been admitted, and they had agreed that each of the abstract qualities exists and that other things which participate in these get their names from them, then Socrates asked: "Now if you assent to this, do you not, when you say that Simmias is greater than Socrates and smaller than Phaedo, say that there is in Simmias greatness and smallness?"
"Yes."
"But," said Socrates, "you agree that the statement that Simmias is greater than Socrates is not true as stated in those words.
For Simmias is not greater than Socrates by reason of being Simmias, but by reason of the greatness he happens to have; nor is he greater than Socrates because Socrates is Socrates, but because Socrates has smallness relatively to his greatness."
"True."
"And again, he is not smaller than Phaedo because Phaedo is Phaedo, but because Phaedo has greatness relatively to Simmias's smallness."
"That is true."
"Then Simmias is called small and great, when he is between the two, surpassing the smallness of the one by exceeding him in height, and granting to the other the greatness that exceeds his own smallness."
And he laughed and said, "I seem to he speaking like a legal document, but it really is very much as I say."
He agreed.
"I am speaking so because I want you to agree with me.
I think it is evident not only that greatness itself will never be great and also small, but that the greatness in us will never admit the small or allow itself to be exceeded.
One of two things must take place: either it flees or withdraws when its opposite, smallness, advances toward it, or it has already ceased to exist by the time smallness comes near it.
But it will not receive and admit smallness, thereby becoming other than it was.
So I have received and admitted smallness and am still the same small person I was;
but the greatness in me, being great, has not suffered itself to become small.
In the same way the smallness in us will never become or be great, nor will any other opposite which is still what it was, ever become or be also its own opposite.
"That," said Cebes, "seems to me quite evident."
Then one of those present I don't just remember who it was said: "In Heaven's name, is not this present doctrine the exact opposite of what was fitted in our earlier discussion, that the greater is generated from the less and the less from the greater and that opposites are always generated from their opposites?
But now it seems to me we are saying, this can never happen."
Socrates cocked his head on one side and listened.
"You have spoken up like a man," he said, "but you do not observe the difference between the present doctrine and what we said before.
We said before that in the case of concrete things opposites are generated from opposites; whereas now we say that the abstract concept of an opposite can never become its own opposite, either in us or in the world about us.
Then we, friend, were talking about things which possess opposite qualities and are called after them, but now about those very opposites the immanence of which gives the things their names.
We say that these latter can never be generated from each other."
At the same time he looked at Cebes and said: "And you, Cebes, are you troubled by any of our friends' objections?"
"No," said Cebes, "not this time; though I confess that objections often do trouble me."
"Well, we are quite agreed," said Socrates, "upon this, that an opposite can never be its own opposite."
"Entirely agreed," said Cebes.
"Now," said he, "see if you agree with me in what follows:
Is there something that you call heat and something you call cold?"
"Yes."
"Are they the same as snow and fire?"
"No, not at all."
"But heat is a different thing from fire and cold differs from snow?"
"Yes."
"Yet I fancy you believe that snow, if (to employ the form of phrase we used before) it admits heat, will no longer be what it was, namely snow, and also warm, but will either withdraw when heat approaches it or will cease to exist."
"Certainly."
"And similarly fire, when cold approaches it, will either withdraw or perish.
It will never succeed in admitting cold and being still fire, as it was before, and also cold."
"That is true," said he.
"The fact is," said he, "in some such cases, that not only the abstract idea itself has a right to the same name through all time, but also something else, which is not the idea, but which always, whenever it exists, has the form of the idea.
But perhaps I can make my meaning clearer by some examples.
In numbers, the odd must always have the name of odd, must it not?"
"Certainly."
"But is this the only thing so called (for this is what I mean to ask), or is there something else, which is not identical with the odd but nevertheless has a right to the name of odd in addition to its own name, because it is of such a nature that it is never separated from the odd?
I mean, for instance, the number three, and there are many other examples.
Take the case of three;
do you not think it may always be called by its own name and also be called odd, which is not the same as three?
Yet the number three and the number five and half of numbers in general are so constituted, that each of them is odd though not identified with the idea of odd.
And in the same way two and four and all the other series of numbers are even, each of them, though not identical with evenness.
Do you agree, or not?"
"Of course," he replied.
"Now see what I want to make plain.
This is my point, that not only abstract opposites exclude each other, but all things which, although not opposites one to another, always contain opposites; these also, we find, exclude the idea which is opposed to the idea contained in them, and when it approaches they either perish or withdraw.
We must certainly agree that the number three will endure destruction or anything else rather than submit to becoming even, while still remaining three, must we not?"
"Certainly," said Cebes.
"But the number two is not the opposite of the number three."
"No."
"Then not only opposite ideas refuse to admit each other when they come near, but certain other things refuse to admit the approach of opposites."
"Very true," he said.
"Shall we then," said Socrates, "determine if we can, what these are?"
"Certainly."
"Then, Cebes, will they be those which always compel anything of which they take possession not only to take their form but also that of some opposite?"
"What do you mean?"
"Such things as we were speaking of just now.
You know of course that those things in which the number three is an essential element must be not only three but also odd."
"Certainly."
"Now such a thing can never admit the idea which is the opposite of the concept which produces this result."
"No, it cannot."
"But the result was produced by the concept of the odd?"
"Yes."
"And the opposite of this is the idea of the even?"
"Yes."
"Then the idea of the even will never be admitted by the number three."
"No."
"Then three has no part in the even."
"No, it has none."
"Then the number three is uneven."
"Yes."
"Now I propose to determine what things, without being the opposites of something, nevertheless refuse to admit it, as the number three, though it is not the opposite of the idea of even, nevertheless refuses to admit it, but always brings forward its opposite against it, and as the number two brings forward the opposite of the odd and fire that of cold, and so forth, for there are plenty of examples.
Now see if you accept this statement: not only will opposites not admit their opposites, but nothing which brings an opposite to that which it approaches will ever admit in itself the oppositeness of that which is brought.
Now let me refresh your memory; for there is no harm in repetition.
The number five will not admit the idea of the even, nor will ten, the double of five, admit the idea of the odd.
Now ten is not itself an opposite, and yet it will not admit the idea of the odd; and so one-and-a-half and other mixed fractions and one-third and other simple fractions reject the idea of the whole.
Do you go with me and agree to this?"
"Yes, I agree entirely," he said, "and am with you."
"Then," said Socrates, "please begin again at the beginning.
And do not answer my questions in their own words, but do as I do.
I give an answer beyond that safe answer which I spoke of at first, now that I see another safe reply deduced from what has just been said.
If you ask me what causes anything in which it is to be hot, I will not give you that safe but stupid answer and say that it is heat, but I can now give a more refined answer, that it is fire; and if you ask, what causes the body in which it is to be ill, I shall not say illness, but fever; and if you ask what causes a number in which it is to be odd, I shall not say oddness, but the number one, and so forth.
Do you understand sufficiently what I mean?"
"Quite sufficiently," he replied.
"Now answer," said he. "What causes the body in which it is to be alive?"
"The soul," he replied.
"Is this always the case?"
"Yes," said he, "of course."
"Then if the soul takes possession of anything it always brings life to it?"
"Certainly," he said.
"Is there anything that is the opposite of life?"
"Yes," said he.
"What?"
"Death."
"Now the soul, as we have agreed before, will never admit the opposite of that which it brings with it."
"Decidedly not," said Cebes.
"Then what do we now call that which does not admit the idea of the even?"
"Uneven," said he.
"And those which do not admit justice and music?"
"Unjust," he replied, "and unmusical."
"Well then what do we call that which does not admit death?"
"Deathless or immortal," he said.
"And the soul does not admit death?"
"No."
"Then the soul is immortal."
"Immortal."
"Very well," said he.
"Shall we say then that this is proved?"
"Yes, and very satisfactorily, Socrates."
"Well then, Cebes," said he,
"if the odd were necessarily imperishable, would not the number three be imperishable?"
"Of course."
"And if that which is without heat were imperishable, would not snow go away whole and unmelted whenever heat was brought in conflict with snow?
For it could not have been destroyed, nor could it have remained and admitted the heat."
"That is very true," he replied.
"In the same way, I think, if that which is without cold were imperishable, whenever anything cold approached fire, it would never perish or be quenched, but would go away unharmed."
"Necessarily," he said.
"And must not the same be said of that which is immortal?
If the immortal is also imperishable, it is impossible for the soul to perish when death comes against it.
For, as our argument has shown, it will not admit death and will not be dead, just as the number three, we said, will not be even, and the odd will not be even, and as fire, and the heat in the fire, will not be cold.
But, one might say, why is it not possible that the odd does not become even when the even comes against it (we agreed to that), but perishes, and the even takes its place?
Now we cannot silence him who raises this question by saying that it does not perish, for the odd is not imperishable.
If that were conceded to us, we could easily silence him by saying that when the even approaches, the odd and the number three go away; and we could make the corresponding reply about fire and heat and the rest, could we not?"
"Certainly."
"And so, too, in the case of the immortal; if it is conceded that the immortal is imperishable, the soul would be imperishable as well as immortal, but if not, further argument is needed."
"But," he said, "it is not needed, so far as that is concerned; for surely nothing would escape destruction, if the immortal, which is everlasting, is perishable."
"All, I think," said Socrates, "would agree that God and the Principle of life, and anything else that is immortal, can never perish."
"All men would, certainly," said he, "and still more, I fancy, the Gods."
"Since, then, the immortal is also indestructible, would not the soul, if it is immortal, be also imperishable?"
"Necessarily.''
"Then when death comes to a man, his mortal part, it seems, dies, but the immortal part goes away unharmed and undestroyed, withdrawing from death."
"So it seems."
"Then, Cebes," said he, "it is perfectly certain that the soul is immortal and imperishable, and our souls will exist somewhere in another world."
"I," said Cebes, "have nothing more to say against that, and I cannot doubt your conclusions, Socrates.
But if Simmias, or anyone else, has anything to say, he would do well to speak, for I do not know to what other time than the present he could defer speaking, if he wishes to say or hear anything about those matters."
"But," said Simmias, "I don't see how I can doubt, either, as to the result of the discussion; but the subject is so great, and I have such a poor opinion of human weakness, that I cannot help having some doubt in my own mind about what has been said."
"Not only that, Simmias," said Socrates, "but our first assumptions ought to be more carefully examined, even though they seem to you to be certain.
And if you analyze them completely, you will, I think, follow and agree with the argument, so far as it is possible for man to do so.
And if this is made clear, you will seek no farther."
"That is true," he said.
"But men," he said, "we ought to bear in mind, that, if the soul is immortal, we must care for it, not only in respect to this time, which we call life, but in respect to all time, and if we neglect it, the danger now appears to be terrible.
For if death were an escape from everything, it would be a boon to the wicked, for when they die they would be freed from the body and from their wickedness together with their souls.
But now, since the soul is seen to be immortal, it cannot escape from evil or be saved in any other way than by becoming as good and wise as possible.
For the soul takes with it to the other world nothing but its education and nurture, and these are said to benefit or injure the departed greatly from the very beginning of his journey thither.
And so it is said that after death, the tutelary genius of each person, to whom he had been allotted in life, leads him to a place where the dead are gathered together; then they are judged and depart to the other world with the guide whose task it is to conduct thither those who come from this world; and when they have there received their due and remained through the time appointed, another guide brings them back after many long periods of time.
And the journey is not as Telephus says in the play of Aeschylus;
for he says a simple path leads to the lower world, but I think the path is neither simple nor single,
for if it were, there would be no need of guides, since no one could miss the way to any place if there were only one road.
But really there seem to be many forks of the road and many windings;
this I infer from the rites and ceremonies practiced here on earth.
Now the orderly and wise soul follows its guide and understands its circumstances;
but the soul that is desirous of the body, as I said before, flits about it, and in the visible world for a long time, and after much resistance and many sufferings is led away with violence and with difficulty by its appointed genius.
And when it arrives at the place where the other souls are, the soul which is impure and has done wrong, by committing wicked murders or other deeds akin to those and the works of kindred souls, is avoided and shunned by all, and no one is willing to be its companion or its guide, but it wanders about alone in utter bewilderment, during certain fixed times, after which it is carried by necessity to its fitting habitation.
But the soul that has passed through life in purity and righteousness, finds gods for companions and guides, and goes to dwell in its proper dwelling.
Now there are many wonderful regions of the earth, and the earth itself is neither in size nor in other respects such as it is supposed to be by those who habitually discourse about it, as I believe on someone's authority."
And Simmias said, "What do you mean, Socrates?
I have heard a good deal about the earth myself, but not what you believe; so I should like to hear it."
"Well Simmias, I do not think I need the art of Glaucus to tell what it is.
But to prove that it is true would, I think, be too hard for the art of Glaucus, and perhaps I should not be able to do it; besides, even if I had the skill, I think my life, Simmias, will end before the discussion could be finished.
However, there is nothing to prevent my telling what I believe the form of the earth to be, and the regions in it."
"Well," said Simmias, "that will be enough."
"I am convinced, then," said he, "that in the first place, if the earth is round and in the middle of the heavens, it needs neither the air nor any other similar force to keep it from falling, but its own equipoise and the homogeneous nature of the heavens on all sides suffice to hold it in place; for a body which is in equipoise and is placed in the center of something which is homogeneous cannot change its inclination in any direction, but will remain always in the same position.
This, then, is the first thing of which I am convinced."
"And rightly," said Simmias.
"Secondly," said he, "I believe that the earth is very large and that we who dwell between the pillars of Hercules and the river Phasis live in a small part of it about the sea, like ants or frogs about a pond, and that many other people live in many other such regions.
For I believe there are in all directions on the earth many hollows of very various forms and sizes, into which the water and mist and air have run together;
but the earth itself is pure and is situated in the pure heaven in which the stars are, the heaven which those who discourse about such matters call the ether;
the water, mist and air are the sediment of this and flow together into the hollows of the earth.
Now we do not perceive that we live in the hollows, but think we live on the upper surface of the earth, just as if someone who lives in the depth of the ocean should think he lived on the surface of the sea, and, seeing the sun and the stars through the water, should think the sea was the sky, and should, by reason of sluggishness or feebleness, never have reached the surface of the sea, and should never have seen, by rising and lifting his head out of the sea into our upper world, and should never have heard from anyone who had seen, how much purer and fairer it is than the world he lived in.
I believe this is just the case with us;
for we dwell in a hollow of the earth and think we dwell on its upper surface; and the air we call the heaven, and think that is the heaven in which the stars move.
But the fact is the same, that by reason of feebleness and sluggishness, we are unable to attain to the upper surface of the air;
for if anyone should come to the top of the air or should get wings and fly up, he could lift his head above it and see, as fishes lift their heads out of the water and see the things in our world, so he would see things in that upper world; and, if his nature were strong enough to bear the sight, he would recognize that that is the real heaven and the real light and the real earth.
For this earth of ours, and the stones and the whole region where we live, are injured and corroded, as in the sea things are injured by the brine, and nothing of any account grows in the sea, and there is, one might say, nothing perfect there, but caverns and sand and endless mud and mire, where there is earth also, and there is nothing at all worthy to be compared with the beautiful things of our world.
But the things in that world above would be seen to be even more superior to those in this world of ours.
If I may tell a story, Simmias, about the things on the earth that is below the heaven, and what they are like, it is well worth hearing."
"By all means, Socrates," said Simmias; "we should be glad to hear this story."
"Well then, my friend," said he, "to begin with, the earth when seen from above is said to look like those balls that are covered with twelve pieces of leather; it is divided into patches of various colors, of which the colors which we see here may be regarded as samples, such as painters use.
But there the whole earth is of such colors, and they are much brighter and purer than ours; for one part is purple of wonderful beauty, and one is golden, and one is white, whiter than chalk or snow, and the earth is made up of the other colors likewise, and they are more in number and more beautiful than those which we see here.
For those very hollows of the earth which are full of water and air, present an appearance of color as they glisten amid the variety of the other colors, so that the whole produces one continuous effect of variety.
And in this fair earth the things that grow, the trees, and flowers and fruits, are correspondingly beautiful; and so too the mountains and the stones are smoother, and more transparent and more lovely in color than ours.
In fact, our highly prized stones, sards and jaspers, and emeralds, and other gems, are fragments of those there, but there everything is like these or still more beautiful.
And the reason of this is that there the stones are pure, and not corroded or defiled, as ours are, with filth and brine by the vapors and liquids which flow together here and which cause ugliness and disease in earth and stones and animals and plants.
And the earth there is adorned with all the jewels and also with gold and silver and everything of the sort.
For there they are in plain sight, abundant and large and in many places, so that the earth is a sight to make those blessed who look upon it.
And there are many animals upon it, and men also, some dwelling inland, others on the coasts of the air, as we dwell about the sea, and others on islands, which the air flows around, near the mainland; and in short, what water and the sea are in our lives, air is in theirs, and what the air is to us, ether is to them.
And the seasons are so tempered that people there have no diseases and live much longer than we, and in sight and hearing and wisdom and all such things are as much superior to us as air is purer than water or the ether than air.
And they have sacred groves and temples of the gods, in which the gods really dwell, and they have intercourse with the gods by speech and prophecies and visions, and they see the sun and moon and stars as they really are, and in all other ways their blessedness is in accord with this.
Such then is the nature of the earth as a whole, and of the things around it.
But round about the whole earth, in the hollows of it, are many regions, some deeper and wider than that in which we live, some deeper but with a narrower opening than ours, and some also less in depth and wider.
Now all these are connected with one another by many subterranean channels, some larger and some smaller, which are bored in all of them, and there are passages through which much water flows from one to another as into mixing bowls;
and there are everlasting rivers of huge size under the earth, flowing with hot and cold water; and there is much fire, and great rivers of fire, and many streams of mud, some thinner and some thicker, like the rivers of mud that flow before the lava in Sicily, and the lava itself.
These fill the various regions as they happen to flow to one or another at any time.
Now a kind of oscillation within the earth moves all these up and down.
And the nature of the oscillation is as follows:
One of the chasms of the earth is greater than the rest, and is bored right through the whole earth; this is the one which Homer means when he says:"Far off, the lowest abyss beneath the earth;
"and which elsewhere he and many other poets have called Tartarus.
For all the rivers flow together into this chasm and flow out of it again, and they have each the nature of the earth through which they flow.
And the reason why all the streams flow in and out here is that this liquid matter has no bottom or foundation.
So it oscillates and waves up and down, and the air and wind about it do the same;
for they follow the liquid both when it moves toward the other side of the earth and when it moves toward this side, and just as the breath of those who breathe blows in and out, so the wind there oscillates with the liquid and causes terrible and irresistible blasts as it rushes in and out.
And when the water retires to the region which we call the lower, it flows into the rivers there and fills them up, as if it were pumped into them;
and when it leaves that region and comes back to this side, it fills the rivers here; and when the streams are filled they flow through the passages and through the earth and come to the various places to which their different paths lead, where they make seas and marshes, and rivers and springs.
Thence they go down again under the earth, some passing around many great regions and others around fewer and smaller places, and flow again into Tartarus, some much below the point where they were sucked out, and some only a little;
but all flow in below their exit.
Some flow in on the side from which they flowed out, others on the opposite side; and some pass completely around in a circle, coiling about the earth once or several times, like serpents, then descend to the lowest possible depth and fall again into the chasm.
Now it is possible to go down from each side to the center, but not beyond, for there the slope rises forward in front of the streams from either side of the earth.
"Now these streams are many and great and of all sorts, but among the many are four streams, the greatest and outermost of which is that called Oceanus, which flows round in a circle, and opposite this, flowing in the opposite direction, is Acheron, which flows through various desert places and, passing under the earth, comes to the Acherusian lake.
To which the souls of most of the dead go and, after remaining there the appointed time, which is for some longer and for others shorter, are sent back to be born again into living beings.
The third river flows out between these two, and near the place whence it issues it falls into a vast region burning with a great fire and makes a lake larger than our Mediterranean sea, boiling with water and mud.
Thence it flows in a circle, turbid and muddy, and comes in its winding course, among other places, to the edge of the Acherusian lake, but does not mingle with its water.
Then, after winding about many times underground, it flows into Tartarus at a lower level.
This is the river which is called Pyriphlegethon, and the streams of lava which spout up at various places on earth are offshoots from it.
Opposite this the fourth river issues, it is said, first into a wild and awful place, which is all of a dark blue color, like lapis lazuli.
This is called the Stygian river, and the lake which it forms by flowing in is the Styx.
And when the river has flowed in here and has received fearful powers into its waters, it passes under the earth and, circling round in the direction opposed to that of Pyriphlegethon, it meets it coming from the other way in the Acherusian lake.
And the water of this river also mingles with no other water, but this also passes round in a circle and falls into Tartarus opposite Pyriphlegethon.
And the name of this river, as the Poets say, is Cocytus.
"Such is the nature of these things.
Now when the dead have come to the place where each is led by his genius, first they are judged and sentenced, as they have lived well and piously, or not.
And those who are found to have lived neither well nor ill, go to the Acheron and, embarking upon vessels provided for them, arrive in them at the lake; there they dwell and are purified,
and if they have done any wrong they are absolved by paying the penalty for their wrong doings, and for their good deeds they receive rewards, each according to his merits.
But those who appear to be incurable, on account of the greatness of their wrongdoings, because they have committed many great deeds of sacrilege, or wicked and abominable murders, or any other such crimes, are cast by their fitting destiny into Tartarus, whence they never emerge.
Those, however, who are curable, but are found to have committed great sins who have, for example, in a moment of passion done some act of violence against father or mother and have lived in repentance the rest of their lives, or who have slain some other person under similar conditions these must needs be thrown into Tartarus, and when they have been there a year the wave casts them out, the homicides by way of Cocytus, those who have outraged their parents by way of Pyriphlegethon.
And when they have been brought by the current to the Acherusian lake, they shout and cry out, calling to those whom they have slain or outraged, begging and beseeching them to be gracious and to let them come out into the lake;
and if they prevail they come out and cease from their ills, but if not, they are borne away again to Tartarus and thence back into the rivers, and this goes on until they prevail upon those whom they have wronged; for this is the penalty imposed upon them by the judges.
But those who are found to have excelled in holy living are freed from these regions within the earth and are released as from prisons; they mount upward into their pure abode and dwell upon the earth.
And of these, all who have duly purified themselves by philosophy live henceforth altogether without bodies, and pass to still more beautiful abodes which it is not easy to describe, nor have we now time enough.
"But, Simmias, because of all these things which we have recounted we ought to do our best to acquire virtue and wisdom in life.
For the prize is fair and the hope great.
"Now it would not be fitting for a man of sense to maintain that all this is just as I have described it, but that this or something like it is true concerning our souls and their abodes, since the soul is shown to be immortal, I think he may properly and worthily venture to believe; for the venture is well worth while; and he ought to repeat such things to himself as if they were magic charms, which is the reason why I have been lengthening out the story so long.
This then is why a man should be of good cheer about his soul, who in his life has rejected the pleasures and ornaments of the body, thinking they are alien to him and more likely to do him harm than good, and has sought eagerly for those of learning, and after adorning his soul with no alien ornaments, but with its own proper adornment of self-restraint and justice and courage and freedom and truth, awaits his departure to the other world, ready to go when fate calls him.
You, Simmias and Cebes and the rest," he said, "will go hereafter, each in his own time; but I am now already, as a tragedian would say, called by fate, and it is about time for me to go to the bath; for I think it is better to bathe before drinking the poison, that the women may not have the trouble of bathing the corpse."
When he had finished speaking, Crito said: "Well, Socrates, do you wish to leave any directions with us about your children or anything else anything we can do to serve you?"
"What I always say, Crito," he replied, "nothing new.
If you take care of yourselves you will serve me and mine and yourselves, whatever you do, even if you make no promises now; but if you neglect yourselves and are not willing to live following step by step, as it were, in the path marked out by our present and past discussions, you will accomplish nothing, no matter how much or how eagerly you promise at present."
"We will certainly try hard to do as you say," he replied.
"But how shall we bury you?"
"However you please," he replied, "if you can catch me and I do not get away from you."
And he laughed gently, and looking towards us, said:
"I cannot persuade Crito, my friends, that the Socrates who is now conversing and arranging the details of his argument is really I; he thinks I am the one whom he will presently see as a corpse, and he asks how to bury me.
And though I have been saying at great length that after I drink the poison I shall no longer be with you, but shall go away to the joys of the blessed you know of, he seems to think that was idle talk uttered to encourage you and myself.
So," he said, "give security for me to Crito, the opposite of that which he gave the judges at my trial;
for he gave security that I would remain, but you must give security that I shall not remain when I die, but shall go away, so that Crito may bear it more easily, and may not be troubled when he sees my body being burnt or buried, or think I am undergoing terrible treatment, and may not say at the funeral that he is laying out Socrates, or following him to the grave, or burying him.
For, dear Crito, you may be sure that such wrong words are not only undesirable in themselves, but they infect the soul with evil.
No, you must be of good courage, and say that you bury my body, and bury it as you think best and as seems to you most fitting."
When he had said this, he got up and went into another room to bathe; Crito followed him, but he told us to wait.
So we waited, talking over with each other and discussing the discourse we had heard, and then speaking of the great misfortune that had befallen us, for we felt that he was like a father to us and that when bereft of him we should pass the rest of our lives as orphans.
And when he had bathed and his children had been brought to him for he had two little sons and one big one and the women of the family had come, he talked with them in Crito's presence and gave them such directions as he wished; then he told the women and the children to go away, and he came to us.
And it was now nearly sunset; for he had spent a long time within.
And he came and sat down fresh from the bath.
After that not much was said, and the servant of the eleven came and stood beside him and said: "Socrates, I shall not find fault with you, as I do with others, for being angry and cursing me, when at the behest of the authorities, I tell them to drink the poison.
No, I have found you in all this time in every way the noblest and gentlest and best man who has ever come here, and now I know your anger is directed against others, not against me, for you know who are blame.
Now, for you know the message I came to bring you, farewell and try to bear what you must as easily as you can."
And he burst into tears and turned and went away.
And Socrates looked up at him and said: "Fare you well, too; I will do as you say."
And then he said to us: "How charming the man is!
Ever since I have been here he has been coming to see me and talking with me from time to time, and has been the best of men, and now how nobly he weeps for me!
But come, Crito, let us obey him, and let someone bring the poison, if it is ready; and if not, let the man prepare it."
And Crito said: "But I think, Socrates, the sun is still upon the mountains and has not yet set;
and I know that others have taken the poison very late, after the order has come to them, and in the meantime have eaten and drunk and some of them enjoyed the society of those whom they loved.
Do not hurry; for there is still time."
And Socrates said: "Crito, those whom you mention are right in doing as they do, for they think they gain by it; and I shall be right in not doing as they do;
for I think I should gain nothing by taking the poison a little later.
I should only make myself ridiculous in my own eyes if I clung to life and spared it, when there is no more profit in it.
Come," he said, "do as I ask and do not refuse."
Thereupon Crito nodded to the boy who was standing near.
The boy went out and stayed a long time, then came back with the man who was to administer the poison, which he brought with him in a cup ready for use.
And when Socrates saw him, he said: "Well, my good man, you know about these things; what must I do?"
"Nothing," he replied, "except drink the poison and walk about till your legs feel heavy; then lie down, and the poison will take effect of itself."
At the same time he held out the cup to Socrates.
He took it, and very gently, Echecrates, without trembling or changing color or expression, but looking up at the man with wide open eyes, as was his custom, said: "What do you say about pouring a libation to some deity from this cup?
May I, or not?"
"Socrates," said he, "we prepare only as much as we think is enough."
"I understand," said Socrates; "but I may and must pray to the gods that my departure hence be a fortunate one;
so I offer this prayer, and may it be granted."
With these words he raised the cup to his lips and very cheerfully and quietly drained it.
Up to that time most of us had been able to restrain our tears fairly well, but when we watched him drinking and saw that he had drunk the poison, we could do so no longer, but in spite of myself my tears rolled down in floods, so that I wrapped my face in my cloak and wept for myself; for it was not for him that I wept, but for my own misfortune in being deprived of such a friend.
Crito had got up and gone away even before I did, because he could not restrain his tears.
But Apollodorus, who had been weeping all the time before, then wailed aloud in his grief and made us all break down, except Socrates himself.
But he said, "What conduct is this, you strange men!
I sent the women away chiefly for this very reason, that they might not behave in this absurd way; for I have heard that it is best to die in silence.
Keep quiet and be brave."
Then having heard this we were ashamed and controlled our tears.
He walked about and, when he said his legs were heavy, lay down on his back, for such was the advice of the attendant.
The man who had administered the poison laid his hands on him and after a while examined his feet and legs, then pinched his foot hard and asked if he felt it.
He said "No";
then after that, his thighs; and passing upwards in this way he showed us that he was growing cold and rigid.
And again he touched him and said that when it reached his heart, he would be gone.
The chill had now reached the region about the groin, and uncovering his face, which had been covered, he said and these were his last words "Crito, we owe a cock to Aesculapius.
Pay it and do not neglect it."
"That," said Crito, "shall be done; but see if you have anything else to say."
To this question he made no reply, but after a little while he moved; the attendant uncovered him; his eyes were fixed.
And Crito when he saw it, closed his mouth and eyes.
Such was the end, Echecrates, of our friend, who was, as we may say, of all those of his time whom we have known, the best and wisest and most righteous man.
Hippias Minor
Eudicus
Socrates
Hippias
Eudicus
Why, then, are you silent, Socrates, when Hippias has been delivering such a fine display?
Why do you not join us in praising some part of his speech, or else, if he seems to you to have been wrong in any point, refute him especially now that we who might best claim to have a share in philosophical discussion have been left to ourselves?
Socrates
Indeed, Eudicus, there are some points in what Hippias was just now saying of Homer, about which I should like to question him.
For I used to hear your father Apemantus say that Homer's Iliad was a finer poem than the Odyssey, and just as much finer as Achilles was finer than Odysseus for he said that one of these poems was made with Odysseus; the other with Achilles as its subject.
So that is a point about which, if it is agreeable to Hippias, I should like to ask what he thinks about these two men, which of them he says is the better; for he has told us in his exhibition many other things of sorts about Homer and other poets.
Eudicus
It is plain enough that Hippias will not object answering if you ask him a question.
Oh, Hippias, if Socrates asks you a question, will you answer?
or what will you do?
Hippias
Why, Eudicus, it would be strange conduct on my part, if I, who always go up to Olympia to the festival of the Greeks from my home at Elis, and entering the sacred precinct, offer to speak on anything that anyone chooses of those subjects which I prepared for exhibition, and to answer any questions that anyone asks should now avoid being questioned by Socrates.
Socrates
You are in a state of blessedness, Hippias, if at every Olympiad you come to the sanctuary with fair hopes concerning your soul and its wisdom; and I should be surprised if any of the physical athletes when he goes to that same place to take part in the contests, has such fearless confidence in his body as you have in your intellect.
Hippias
Naturally, Socrates, I am in this state: for since I began to contend at the Olympic games, I never yet met anyone better than myself in anything.
Socrates
That is splendid, Hippias!
Your reputation will be a monument of wisdom for the city of Elis and your parents.
But now what do you say about Achilles and Odysseus?
Which do you say is the better and in what respect?
For when there were many of us in the room, and you were making your exhibition, I could not keep up with what you were saying: for I hesitated to ask questions, because there was a great crowd in the room, also for fear of hindering your exhibition by doing so;
but now, since we are fewer and Eudicus here urges me to question you, speak and tell us clearly what you said about these two men;
how did you distinguish them?
Hippias
Why I am glad, Socrates, to explain to you still more clearly what I say about these and others also.
For I say that Homer made Achilles the bravest man of those who went to Troy, and Nestor the wisest, and Odysseus the wiliest.
Socrates
Oh dear, Hippias!
Would you do me the favour not to laugh at me if I find it hard to understand what you say, and keep asking questions over and over?
Please try to answer me gently and courteously.
Hippias
Of course; for it would be a disgrace, Socrates, if I, who teach others good manners and charge them money for it, should not myself, when questioned by you, be considerate and reply gently.
Socrates
That is excellent.
For when you said that the poet made Achilles the bravest of men, and Nestor the wisest, I thought I understood what you meant; but when you said that he made Odysseus the wiliest, to tell you the truth, I do not in the least know what you mean by that.
Now tell me, and perhaps it may result in my understanding better.
Has not Homer made Achilles wily?
Hippias
Not at all, Socrates; he made him most simple; for in "The Prayers," when he depicts them talking with one another, he makes Achilles say to Odysseus:
Zeus-born son of Laertes, wily Odysseus,
I must speak out the word without refraining,
as I shall act and think will be accomplished
For hateful to me as the gates of Hades
is he who hides one thing in his heart and says another.
But I shall speak that which shall be accomplished."
In these lines he makes plain the character of each of the men, that Achilles is true and simple, and Odysseus wily and false for he represents Achilles as saying these lines to Odysseus.
Socrates
Now at last, Hippias, I think I understand what you mean; you mean that the wily man is false, apparently.
Hippias
Certainly, Socrates; for Homer represents Odysseus as that sort of a man in many passages of both Iliad and Odyssey.
Socrates
Homer, then, as it seems, thought that a true man was one man and a false man another, but not the same.
Hippias
Of course he did, Socrates.
Socrates
And do you think so yourself, Hippias?
Hippias
Most assuredly; for it would be strange if I did not.
Socrates
Then let us drop Homer, since it is impossible to ask him what he meant when he made those verses; but since you come forward to take up his cause, and agree in this which you say is his meaning, do you answer for Homer and yourself in common.
Hippias
Very well; ask briefly whatever you like.
Socrates
Do you say that the false are, like the sick, without power to do anything, or that they have power to do something?
Hippias
I say that they have great power to do many things, and especially to deceive people.
Socrates
They are, then, powerful, according to you, and wily, are they not?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
But are they wily and deceivers by reason of simplicity and folly, or by reason of shrewdness and a sort of intelligence?
Hippias
By shrewdness, most assuredly, and intelligence.
Socrates
They are intelligent, then, as it seems.
Hippias
Yes, by Zeus, too much so.
Socrates
And being intelligent, do they know what they are doing, or do they not know?
Hippias
Yes, they know very well; that is why they do harm.
Socrates
And knowing these things which they know, are they ignorant, or wise?
Hippias
Wise, surely, in just this, deception.
Socrates
Stop.
Let us recall what you say.
You say that the false are powerful and intelligent, and knowing and wise in those things in which they are false?
Hippias
Yes, I do.
Socrates
And that the true and the false are different and complete opposites of one another?
Hippias
I do.
Socrates
Well, then, the false are among the powerful and the wise, according to your statement.
Hippias
Certainly.
Socrates
And when you say that the false are powerful and wise for falsehood, do you mean that they have power to utter falsehoods if they like, or that they are powerless in respect to the falsehoods which they utter?
Hippias
That they have power.
Socrates
In short, then, the false are those who are wise and powerful in uttering falsehoods.
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
A man, then, who has not the power to utter falsehoods and is ignorant would not be false.
Hippias
That is true.
Socrates
Well, but every man has power who does what he wishes at the time when he wishes;
I am not speaking of one who is prevented by disease or that sort of thing, but as I might say of you that you have power to write my name when you wish
or do you not say that a man has power who is in such a condition?
Hippias
Yes, I do.
Socrates
Tell me, then, Hippias, are you not skillful in arithmetical calculations?
Hippias
Most assuredly, Socrates.
Socrates
Then if some one were to ask you what the product of three times seven hundred is, you could, if you wished, tell him the truth about that more quickly and better than anyone else?
Hippias
Certainly.
Socrates
Because you are the most powerful and wisest of men in these matters?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
Are you, then, merely wisest and most powerful, or are you also best in those matters in which you are most powerful and wisest, namely calculations?
Hippias
Best also, to be sure, Socrates.
Socrates
Then you would have the greatest power to tell the truth about these things, would you not?
Hippias
I think so.
Socrates
But what of falsehoods about these same things?
And please answer this with the same splendid frankness as my previous questions, Hippias.
If some one were to ask you how much three times seven hundred is, would you have the most power to tell falsehoods and always uniformly to say false things about these matters, if you wished to tell falsehoods and never to reply truly; or would he who is ignorant of calculations have more power to tell falsehoods than you, if you wished to do so?
Or would the ignorant man often, when he wished to tell falsehoods, involuntarily tell the truth, if it so happened, because he did not know, whereas you, the wise man, if you wished to tell falsehoods, would tell them always and uniformly?
Hippias
Yes, it is as you say.
Socrates
Is the false man, then, false about other things, but not about number, and would he not tell falsehoods when dealing with number?
Hippias
He is false about number also, by Zeus.
Socrates
Shall we, then, assume this also, that there is such a person as a man who is false about calculation and number?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
Now who would that man be?
Must he not, as you just now agreed, have power to tell falsehoods, if he is to be false?
For it was said by you, if you recollect, that he who has not the power to tell falsehoods would never be false.
Hippias
Yes, I recollect, that was said.
Socrates
And just now you were found to have most power to tell falsehoods about calculations, were you not?
Hippias
Yes, that also was said.
Socrates
Have you, then, also most power to tell the truth about calculations?
Hippias
Certainly.
Socrates
Then the same man has most power to speak both falsehood and truth about calculations; and this man is the one who is good in respect to them, namely the calculator.
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
Who, then, becomes false in respect to calculation, Hippias, other than the good man?
For the same man is also powerful and he is also true.
Hippias
So it appears.
Socrates
You see, then, that the same man is both false and true in respect to these matters, and the true is in no wise better than the false?
For he is indeed the same man, and the two are not utter opposites, as you thought just now.
Hippias
Apparently not, at least in this field.
Socrates
Shall we, then, investigate elsewhere?
Hippias
If you like.
Socrates
Well, then, are you expert in geometry also?
Hippias
I am.
Socrates
Well, has not the same man most power to speak falsehood and truth about geometry, namely the geometrician?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
In respect to that, then, is any other good than he?
Hippias
No, no other.
Socrates
The good and wise geometrician, then, has the most power in both respects, has he not?
And if anyone is false in respect to diagrams, it would be this man, the good geometrician?
For he has the power, and the bad one was powerless, to speak falsehood; so that he who has no power to speak falsehood would not become false, as has been agreed.
Hippias
That is true.
Socrates
Let us, then, investigate also the third man, the astronomer, whose art you think you know even better than those of the previous ones;
do you not, Hippias?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
Are not the same things true in astronomy also?
Hippias
Probably, Socrates.
Socrates
Then in astronomy also, if anyone is false, the good astronomer will be false, he who has power to speak falsehood.
For he who has not power will not for he is ignorant.
Hippias
So it appears.
Socrates
The same man, then, in astronomy will be true and false.
Hippias
So it seems.
Socrates
Come now, Hippias, consider generally in this way concerning all the sciences, whether this is the case, or not.
Certainly you are the wisest of men in the greatest number of arts, as I once heard you boast, recounting your great and enviable wisdom in the market-place at the tables of the moneychangers.
You said that once, when you went to Olympia, everything you had on your person was your own work;
first the ring for you began with that which you had was your own work, showing that you knew how to engrave rings, and another seal was your work, and a strigil and an oil-flask were your works; then you said that you yourself had made the sandals you had on, and had woven your cloak and tunic;
and, what seemed to every one most unusual and proof of the most wisdom, was when you said that the girdle you wore about your tunic was like the Persian girdles of the costliest kind, and that you had made it yourself.
And in addition you said that you brought with you poems, both epics and tragedies and dithyrambs, and many writings of all sorts composed in prose;
and that you were there excelling all others in knowledge of the arts of which I was speaking just now, and of the correctness of rhythms and harmonies and letters, and many other things besides, as I seem to remember; and yet I forgot your art of memory, as it seems, in which you think you are most brilliant; and I fancy I have forgotten a great many other things.
But, as I say, look both at your own arts and there are plenty of them and at those of others, and tell me if you find, in accordance with the agreements you and I have reached, any point where one man is true and another false, where they are separate and not the same.
Look for this in any branch whatsoever of wisdom or shrewdness or whatever you choose to call it; but you will not find it, my friend, for it does not exist; just tell me.
Hippias
But I cannot, Socrates, at least, not now offhand.
Socrates
And you never will be able to tell me, I fancy; but if what I say is true, Hippias, you remember what results from our argument.
Hippias
I do not at all understand what you mean, Socrates.
Socrates
No, for perhaps you are not using your art of memory; for you evidently think it is not necessary; but I will remind you.
Do you remember that you said that Achilles was true and Odysseus was false and wily?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
Do you now, then, perceive that the same man has been found to be false and true, so that if Odysseus was false, he becomes also true, and if Achilles was true, he becomes also false, and the two men are not different from one another, nor opposites, but alike?
Hippias
Socrates, you are always making intricate arguments of this sort, and, picking out the most difficult part of the argument, you stick to it in detail, and you do not discuss the whole subject with which the argument deals; for now, if you like, I will prove to you by satisfactory argument based on many pieces of evidence, that Homer made Achilles better than Odysseus and free from falsehood, and Odysseus crafty and a teller of many falsehoods and inferior to Achilles.
And, if you like, do you oppose argument to argument, maintaining that the other is better; and these gentlemen here will determine which of us speaks better.
Socrates
Hippias, I do not doubt that you are wiser than I; but it is always my custom to pay attention when anyone is speaking, especially when the speaker seems to me to be wise; and because I desire to learn what he means, I question him thoroughly and examine and compare the things he says, in order that I may learn.
But if the speaker seems to me to be worthless, I neither ask questions nor care what he says.
And by this you will recognize whom I regard as wise; for you will find me persistently asking such a man questions about what he says, in order that I may profit by learning something.
And so now I noticed when you were speaking, that in the lines which you repeated just now to show that Achilles speaks to Odysseus as to a deceiver, it seems to me very strange, if what you say is true, that Odysseus the wily is nowhere found to have spoken falsely, but Achilles is found to be a wily sort of person, according to your argument; at any rate, he speaks falsely.
For he begins by speaking these lines which you just quoted:
"For hateful to me as the gates of Hades is he who hides one thing in his heart and says another,"
and a little later says that he would not be persuaded by Odysseus and Agamemnon and would not stay at Troy at all, but,
"Tomorrow, after sacrificing to Zeus and all the gods, (he says), I will load my ships well and drag them into the sea; then you shall see, if you like and if it interests you, early in the morning my ships sailing the fishy Hellespont
and my men eagerly rowing in them; and if the glorious Earthshaker should grant me a fair voyage, on the third day I should come to fertile Phthia."
And even before that, when he was reviling Agamemnon, he said:"And now I shall go to Phthia, since it is far better to go home with my beaked ships, and I do not intend to stay here without honor, and heap up wealth and riches for you.
After he has said these things, at one time in the presence of the whole army and at another before his own comrades, he is nowhere found to have either prepared or attempted to drag down his ships to sail home, but he shows quite superb disregard of truthspeaking.
Now I, Hippias, asked my question in the first place because I was perplexed as to which of the two men is represented as better by the poet, and because I thought both were very good, and it was hard to decide which was better, both in regard to falsehood and truth and to virtue in general; for both are similar in this matter.
Hippias
That is because you do not look at it aright, Socrates.
For the falsehoods that Achilles utters, he utters evidently not by design, but against his will, since he is forced by the misfortune of the army to remain and give assistance; but Odysseus utters his falsehoods voluntarily and by design.
Socrates
You are deceiving me, beloved Hippias, and are yourself imitating Odysseus.
Hippias
Not at all, Socrates.
What do you mean and to what do you refer?
Socrates
That you say Achilles did not speak falsely by design, he who was not only a deceiver, but was also such a cheat and plotter, as Homer has represented him, that he is seen to be so much more clever than Odysseus in deceiving him unnoticed without difficulty, that he dared to contradict himself in his presence, and Odysseus did not notice it; at any rate Odysseus does not appear to have said anything to him which indicates that he noticed his falsehood.
Hippias
What is this that you say, Socrates?
Socrates
Don't you know that after he said to Odysseus that he was going to sail away at daybreak, in speaking to Ajax he does not repeat that he is going to sail away, but says something different?
Hippias
Where, pray?
Socrates
Where he says:
For I shall not be mindful of bloody war until warlike Priam's son,
the glorious Hector,
shall reach the tents and ships of the Myrmidons through slaughter of Argives and shall burn the ships with fire.
But at my tent and my black ship I think Hector, though eager for battle, will come to a halt."
Now, Hippias, do you think the son of Thetis and pupil of the most wise Cheiron was so forgetful, that, although a little earlier he had reviled deceivers in the most extreme terms, he himself immediately said to Odysseus that he was going to sail away and to Ajax that he was going to stay, and was not acting by design and in the belief that Odysseus was behind the times and that he himself would get the better of him in just this matter of contrivance and falsehood?
Hippias
No, I do not agree, Socrates; but in this case also Achilles was induced by the goodness of his heart to say to Ajax something different from what he had said to Odysseus; whereas Odysseus, when he speaks the truth always speaks with design, and when he speaks falsehood likewise.
Socrates
Then Odysseus, as it seems, is better than Achilles.
Hippias
Not in the least, Socrates.
Socrates
How is that, were not those who utter falsehoods voluntarily found to be better than those who do so involuntarily?
Hippias
And how, Socrates, could those who voluntarily do wrong and voluntarily and designedly do harm be better than those who do so involuntarily?
And there seems to be good reason to forgive a man who unwittingly does wrong or speaks falsehood or does any other evil.
And the laws surely are much more severe towards those who do evil and tell falsehoods voluntarily, than towards those who do so involuntarily.
Socrates
Do you see, Hippias, that I speak the truth when I say that I am persistent in questioning wise men?
And this is probably the only good thing about me, as I am otherwise quite worthless;
for I am all wrong about facts, and do not know the truth about them.
And it is to me sufficient proof of the truth of this, that when I come into contact with one of you who are famous for wisdom, and to whose wisdom all the Greeks bear witness, I am found to know nothing;
for there is hardly a single thing about which you and I have the same opinion;
and yet what greater proof of ignorance is there than when one disagrees with a wise man?
But I have this one remarkable good quality, which is my salvation;
for I am not afraid to learn, but I inquire and ask questions and am very grateful to him who answers, and I never failed in gratitude to anyone;
for when I have learned anything I have never denied it, pretending that the information was a discovery of my own; but I praise the wisdom of him who instructed me and proclaim what I learned from him.
And so now I do not agree with what you say, but disagree very strongly; and I know very well that this is my own fault, because I am the sort of man I am not to give myself any greater title.
For my opinion, Hippias, is the exact opposite of what you say; I think that those who injure people and do wrong and speak falsehood and cheat and err voluntarily, not involuntarily, are better than those who do so involuntarily.
Sometimes, however, the opposite of this seems to me to be the case, and I am all astray about these matters, evidently because I am ignorant; but now at the present moment a sort of paroxysm of my disease has come upon me, and those who err in respect to anything voluntarily appear to me better than those who err involuntarily.
And I lay the blame for my present condition upon our previous argument, which causes those who do any of these things involuntarily to appear to me at this moment worse than those who do them voluntarily.
So please do me a favour and do not refuse to cure my soul; for you will be doing me much more good if you cure my soul of ignorance, than if you were to cure my body of disease.
Now if you choose to deliver a long speech, I tell you beforehand that you would not cure me for I could not follow you but if you are willing to answer me, as you did just now, you will do me a great deal of good, and I think you yourself will not be injured, either.
And I might fairly call upon you also, son of Apemantus, for help; for you stirred me up to converse with Hippias; so now, if Hippias is unwilling to answer me, ask him in my behalf to do so.
Eudicus
Well, Socrates, I imagine Hippias will need no asking from us; for that is not what he announced; he announced that he would not avoid the questioning of any man.
How is that, Hippias?
Is not that what you said?
Hippias
Yes, I did; but Socrates, Eudicus, always makes confusion in arguments, and seems to want to make trouble.
Socrates
Most excellent Hippias, I do not do these voluntarily at all for then I should be wise and clever, according to you but involuntarily, so forgive me; for you say, too, that he who does evil involuntarily ought to be forgiven.
Eudicus
And do not refuse, Hippias; but for our sake, and also because of your previous announcements, answer any questions Socrates asks you.
Hippias
Well, I will answer since you request it.
Ask whatever questions you like.
Socrates
I certainly have a great desire, Hippias, to investigate what we are just at present talking about, namely which are better, those who err voluntarily or those who err involuntarily.
Now I think the best way to go at the investigation is this.
Just answer.
Do you call some one a good runner?
Hippias
I do.
Socrates
And a bad one?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
Now, he who runs well is a good runner, and he who runs badly a bad one; is it not so?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
Then does not he who runs slowly run badly, and he who runs fast run well?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
In a race, then, and in running, rapidity is a good thing, and slowness an evil.
Hippias
Why, of course.
Socrates
Which, then, is the better runner, he who runs slowly voluntarily or he who does so involuntarily?
Hippias
He who does it voluntarily.
Socrates
Well, then, is not running doing something?
Hippias
Yes, it is doing.
Socrates
And if doing, is it not also performing some act?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
Then he who runs badly performs a bad and disgraceful act in a race?
Hippias
Yes, a bad act of course.
Socrates
But he runs badly who runs slowly?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
Then the good runner performs this bad and disgraceful act voluntarily, and the bad runner involuntarily?
Hippias
So it seems.
Socrates
In running, then, he who does bad acts involuntarily is worse than he who does them voluntarily?
Hippias
Yes, in running.
Socrates
And how is it in wrestling?
Which is the better wrestler, he who is thrown voluntarily, or involuntarily?
Hippias
He who is thrown voluntarily, as it seems.
Socrates
But is it worse and more disgraceful in a wrestling match to be thrown or to throw one's opponent?
Hippias
To be thrown.
Socrates
In wrestling also, then, he who performs bad and disgraceful acts voluntarily is a better wrestler than he who performs them involuntarily.
Hippias
So it seems.
Socrates
And how is it in every other bodily exercise?
Is not he who is the better man in respect to his body able to perform both kinds of acts, the strong and the weak, the disgraceful and the fine, so that whenever he performs bad acts of a bodily kind, he who is the better man in respect to his body does them voluntarily, but he who is worse does them involuntarily?
Hippias
That seems to be the case in matters of strength also.
Socrates
And how about grace, Hippias?
Does not the better body take ugly and bad postures voluntarily, and the worse body involuntarily?
Or what is your opinion?
Hippias
That is my opinion.
Socrates
Then ungracefulness when voluntary is associated with excellence of the body, but when involuntary with faultiness.
Hippias
Apparently.
Socrates
And what do you say about the voice?
Which do you say is the better?
That which sings out of tune voluntarily, or involuntarily?
Hippias
That which does it voluntarily.
Socrates
And that which does it involuntarily is the worse?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
Would you choose to possess good or bad things?
Hippias
Good ones.
Socrates
Would you, then, choose to possess feet that limp voluntarily, or involuntarily?
Hippias
Voluntarily.
Socrates
But is not a limp faultiness and ungracefulness of the feet?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
Well, is not dimness of sight faultiness of the eyes?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
Which eyes, then, would you choose to possess and live with?
Those with which one would see dimly and incorrectly voluntarily, or involuntarily?
Hippias
Those with which one would do so voluntarily.
Socrates
Those parts, then, of yourself which voluntarily act badly you consider better than those which do so involuntarily?
Hippias
Yes; that is, in matters of that sort.
Socrates
Well, then, one statement embraces all alike, such as ears and nose and mouth and all the senses that those which act badly involuntarily are undesirable because they are bad, and those which do so voluntarily are desirable because they are good.
Hippias
I think so.
Socrates
Well now, which instruments are better to have to do with, those with which a man does bad work voluntarily, or involuntarily?
For instance, is a rudder better with which a man will involuntarily steer badly, or one with which he will do so voluntarily?
Hippias
One with which he will do so voluntarily.
Socrates
And is not the same true of a bow and a lyre and flutes and all the rest?
Hippias
Quite true.
Socrates
Well now, would you choose to possess a horse of such spirit that you would ride him badly voluntarily, or involuntarily?
Hippias
Voluntarily.
Socrates
Then that spirit is better.
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
Then with the horse of better spirit one would do voluntarily the bad acts of that spirit, but with the one of worse spirit involuntarily?
Hippias
Certainly.
Socrates
And is not that true of a dog, and all other animals?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
Well now, then, in the case of an archer is it better to possess the mind which voluntarily misses the mark, or that which does so involuntarily?
Hippias
That which does so voluntarily.
Socrates
Then that is the better mind for the purpose of archery?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
Is, then, the mind also which errs involuntarily worse than that which errs voluntarily?
Hippias
Yes, in the case of archery.
Socrates
And how is it in the art of medicine?
Is not the mind which does harm to the patients' bodies voluntarily the more scientific?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
In this art, then, this mind is better than the other.
Hippias
It is better.
Socrates
Well now, the more musical, whether with lyre or with flute, and in everything else that concerns all the other arts and sciences is not that mind better which voluntarily does bad and disgraceful things and commits errors, whereas that which does so involuntarily is worse?
Hippias
Apparently.
Socrates
And surely we should prefer to possess slaves of such minds that they voluntarily commit errors and do mischief, rather than such as do so involuntarily; we should think them better fitted for their duties.
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
Well now, should we not wish to possess our own mind in the best possible condition?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
Will it, then, be better if it does evil and errs voluntarily, or involuntarily?
Hippias
But it would be a terrible thing, Socrates, if those who do wrong voluntarily are to be better than those who do so involuntarily.
Socrates
But surely they appear, at least, to be so, from what has been said.
Hippias
Not to me.
Socrates
I thought, Hippias, they appeared to be so to you also.
But now once more answer me: Is not justice either a sort of power or knowledge, or both?
Or must not justice inevitably be one or other of these
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
Then injustice is a power of the soul, the more powerful soul is the more just, is it not?
For we found, my friend, that such a soul was better.
Hippias
Yes, we did.
Socrates
And what if it be knowledge?
Is not the wiser soul more just, and the more ignorant more unjust?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
And what if it be both?
Is not the soul which has both, power and knowledge, more just, and the more ignorant more unjust?
Is that not inevitably the case?
Hippias
It appears to be.
Socrates
This more powerful and wiser soul, then, was found to be better and to have more power to do both good and disgraceful acts in every kind of action was it not?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
Whenever, then, it does disgraceful acts, it does them voluntarily, by reason of power and art; and these, either one or both of them, are attributes of justice.
Hippias
So it seems.
Socrates
And doing injustice is doing evil acts, and not doing injustice is doing good acts.
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
Will not, then, the more powerful and better soul, when it does injustice, do it voluntarily, and the bad soul involuntarily?
Hippias
Apparently.
Socrates
Is not, then, a good man he who has a good soul, and a bad man he who has a bad one?
Hippias
Yes.
Socrates
It is, then, in the nature of the good man to do injustice voluntarily, and of the bad man to do it involuntarily, that is, if the good man has a good soul.
Hippias
But surely he has.
Socrates
Then he who voluntarily errs and does disgraceful and unjust acts, Hippias, if there be such a man, would be no other than the good man.
Hippias
I cannot agree with you, Socrates, in that.
Socrates
Nor I with myself, Hippias;
but that appears at the moment to be the inevitable result of our argument;
however, as I was saying all along, in respect to these matters I go astray, up and down, and never hold the same opinion;
and that I, or any other ordinary man, go astray is not surprising; but if you wise men likewise go astray, that is a terrible thing for us also, if even when we have come to you we are not to cease from our straying.
Ion
Socrates
Ion
Socrates
Welcome, Ion.
Where have you come from now, to pay us this visit?
From your home in Ephesus?
Ion
No, no, Socrates; from Epidaurus and the festival there of Asclepius.
Socrates
Do you mean to say that the Epidaurians honor the god with a contest of rhapsodes also?
Ion
Certainly, and of music in general.
Socrates
Why then, you were competing in some contest, were you?
And how went your competition?
Ion
We carried off the first prize, Socrates.
Socrates
Well done: so now, mind that we win too at the Panathenaea.
Ion
Why, so we shall, God willing.
Socrates
I must say I have often envied you rhapsodes, Ion, for your art:
for besides that it is fitting to your art that your person should be adorned and that you should look as handsome as possible, the necessity of being conversant with a number of good poets, and especially with Homer, the best and divinest poet of all, and of apprehending his thought and not merely learning off his words, is a matter for envy;
since a man can never be a good rhapsode without understanding what the poet says.
For the rhapsode ought to make himself an interpreter of the poet's thought to his audience; and to do this properly without knowing what the poet means is impossible.
So one cannot but envy all this.
Ion
What you say is true, Socrates: I at any rate have found this the most laborious part of my art; and I consider I speak about Homer better than anybody, for neither Metrodorus of Lampsacus, nor Stesimbrotus of Thasos, nor Glaucon, nor any one that the world has ever seen, had so many and such fine comments to offer on Homer as I have.
Socrates
That is good news, Ion; for obviously you will not grudge me an exhibition of them.
Ion
And indeed it is worth hearing, Socrates, how well I have embellished Homer; so that I think I deserve to be crowned with a golden crown by the Homeridae.
Socrates
Yes, and I must find myself leisure some time to listen to you; but for the moment, please answer this little question: are you skilled in Homer only, or in Hesiod and Archilochus as well?
Ion
No, no, only in Homer; for that seems to me quite enough.
Socrates
And is there anything on which Homer and Hesiod both say the same?
Ion
Yes, I think there are many such cases.
Socrates
Then in those cases would you expound better what Homer says than what Hesiod says?
Ion
I should do it equally well in those cases, Socrates, where they say the same.
Socrates
But what of those where they do not say the same?
For example, about the seer's art, on which both Homer and Hesiod say something.
Ion
Quite so.
Socrates
Well then, would you, or one of the good seers, expound better what these two poets say, not only alike but differently, about the seer's art?
Ion
One of the seers.
Socrates
And if you were a seer, would you not, with an ability to expound what they say in agreement, know also how to expound the points on which they differ?
Ion
Of course.
Socrates
Then how is it that you are skilled in Homer, and not in Hesiod or the other poets?
Does Homer speak of any other than the very things that all the other poets speak of?
Has he not described war for the most part, and the mutual intercourse of men, good and bad, lay and professional, and the ways of the gods in their intercourse with each other and with men, and happenings in the heavens and in the underworld, and origins of gods and heroes?
Are not these the subjects of Homer's poetry?
Ion
What you say is true, Socrates.
Socrates
And what of the other poets?
Do they not treat of the same things?
Ion
Yes; but, Socrates, not on Homer's level.
Socrates
What, in a worse way?
Ion
Far worse.
Socrates
And Homer in a better?
Ion
Better indeed, I assure you.
Socrates
Well now, Ion, dear soul; when several people are talking about number, and one of them speaks better than the rest, I suppose there is some one who will distinguish the good speaker?
Ion
I agree.
Socrates
And will this some one be the same as he who can distinguish the bad speakers, or different?
Ion
The same, I suppose.
Socrates
And he will be the man who has the art of numeration?
Ion
Yes.
Socrates
And again, when several are talking about what kinds of foods are wholesome, and one of them speaks better than the rest, will it be for two different persons to distinguish the superiority of the best speaker and the inferiority of a worse one, or for the same?
Ion
Obviously, I should say, for the same.
Socrates
Who is he?
What is his name?
Ion
A doctor.
Socrates
And so we may state, in general terms, that the same person will always distinguish, given the same subject and several persons talking about it, both who speaks well and who badly: otherwise, if he is not going to distinguish the bad speaker, clearly he will not distinguish the good one either, where the subject is the same.
Ion
That is so.
Socrates
And the same man is found to be skilled in both?
Ion
Yes.
Socrates
And you say that Homer and the other poets, among whom are Hesiod and Archilochus, all speak about the same things, only not similarly; but the one does it well, and the rest worse?
Ion
Yes, and what I say is true.
Socrates
And since you distinguish the good speaker, you could distinguish also the inferiority of the worse speakers.
Ion
So it would seem.
Socrates
Then, my excellent friend, we shall not be wrong in saying that our Ion is equally skilled in Homer and in the other poets, seeing that you yourself admit that the same man will be a competent judge of all who speak on the same things, and that practically all the poets treat of the same things.
Ion
Then what can be the reason, Socrates, why I pay no attention when somebody discusses any other poet, and am unable to offer any remark at all of any value, but simply drop into a doze, whereas if anyone mentions something connected with Homer I wake up at once and attend and have plenty to say?
Socrates
That is not difficult to guess, my good friend; anyone can see that you are unable to speak on Homer with art and knowledge.
For if you could do it with art, you could speak on all the other poets as well; since there is an art of poetry, I take it, as a whole, is there not?
Ion
Yes.
Socrates
And when one has acquired any other art whatever as a whole, the same principle of inquiry holds through all the arts?
Do you require some explanation from me, Ion, of what I mean by this?
Ion
Yes, upon my word, Socrates, I do; for I enjoy listening to you wise men.
Socrates
I only wish you were right there, Ion: but surely it is you rhapsodes and actors, and the men whose poems you chant, who are wise; whereas I speak but the plain truth, as a simple layman might.
For in regard to this question I asked you just now, observe what a trifling commonplace it was that I uttered a thing that any man might know namely, that when one has acquired a whole art the inquiry is the same.
Let us just think it out thus: there is an art of painting as a whole?
Ion
Yes.
Socrates
And there are and have been many painters, good and bad?
Ion
Certainly.
Socrates
Now have you ever found anybody who is skilled in pointing out the successes and failures among the works of Polygnotus son of Aglaophon, but unable to do so with the works of the other painters;
and who, when the works of the other painters are exhibited, drops into a doze, and is at a loss, and has no remark to offer; but when he has to pronounce upon Polygnotus or any other painter you please, and on that one only, wakes up and attends and has plenty to say?
Ion
No, on my honor, I certainly have not.
Socrates
Or again, in sculpture, have you ever found anyone who is skilled in expounding the successes of Daedalus son of Metion, or Epeius son of Panopeus, or Theodorus of Samos, or any other single sculptor, but in face of the works of the other sculptors is at a loss and dozes, having nothing to say?
Ion
No, on my honor, I have not found such a man as that either.
Socrates
But further, I expect you have also failed to find one in fluting or harping or minstrelsy or rhapsodizing who is skilled in expounding the art of Olympus or Thamyras, or Orpheus, or Phemius, the rhapsode of Ithaca, but is at a loss and has no remark to offer on the successes or failures in rhapsody of Ion of Ephesus.
Ion
I cannot gainsay you on that, Socrates: but of one thing I am conscious in myself that I excel all men in speaking on Homer and have plenty to say, and everyone else says that I do it well; but on the others I am not a good speaker.
Yet now, observe what that means.
Socrates
I do observe it, Ion, and I am going to point out to you what I take it to mean.
For, as I was saying just now, this is not an art in you, whereby you speak well on Homer, but a divine power, which moves you like that in the stone which Euripides named a magnet, but most people call "Heraclea stone."
For this stone not only attracts iron rings, but also imparts to them a power whereby they in turn are able to do the very same thing as the stone, and attract other rings; so that sometimes there is formed quite a long chain of bits of iron and rings, suspended one from another; and they all depend for this power on that one stone.
In the same manner also the Muse inspires men herself, and then by means of these inspired persons the inspiration spreads to others, and holds them in a connected chain.
For all the good epic poets utter all those fine poems not from art, but as inspired and possessed, and the good lyric poets likewise; just as the Corybantian worshippers do not dance when in their senses, so the lyric poets do not indite those fine songs in their senses, but when they have started on the melody and rhythm they begin to be frantic, and it is under possession as the bacchants are possessed, and not in their senses, when they draw honey and milk from the rivers that the soul of the lyric poets does the same thing, by their own report.
For the poets tell us, I believe, that the songs they bring us are the sweets they cull from honey-dropping founts in certain gardens and glades of the Muses like the bees, and winging the air as these do.
And what they tell is true.
For a poet is a light and winged and sacred thing, and is unable ever to indite until he has been inspired and put out of his senses, and his mind is no longer in him: every man, whilst he retains possession of that, is powerless to indite a verse or chant an oracle.
Seeing then that it is not by art that they compose and utter so many fine things about the deeds of men as you do about Homer but by a divine dispensation, each is able only to compose that to which the Muse has stirred him, this man dithyrambs, another laudatory odes, another dance-songs, another epic or else iambic verse; but each is at fault in any other kind.
For not by art do they utter these things, but by divine influence; since, if they had fully learnt by art to speak on one kind of theme, they would know how to speak on all.
And for this reason God takes away the mind of these men and uses them as his ministers, just as he does soothsayers and godly seers, in order that we who hear them may know that it is not they who utter these words of great price, when they are out of their wits, but that it is God himself who speaks and addresses us through them.
A convincing proof of what I say is the case of Tynnichus, the Chalcidian, who had never composed a single poem in his life that could deserve any mention, and then produced the paean which is in everyone's mouth, almost the finest song we have, simply as he says himself "an invention of the Muses."
For the god, as it seems to me, intended him to be a sign to us that we should not waver or doubt that these fine poems are not human or the work of men, but divine and the work of gods; and that the poets are merely the interpreters of the gods, according as each is possessed by one of the heavenly powers.
To show this forth, the god of set purpose sang the finest of songs through the meanest of poets: or do you not think my statement true, Ion?
Ion
Yes, upon my word, I do: for you somehow touch my soul with your words, Socrates, and I believe it is by divine dispensation that good poets interpret to us these utterances of the gods.
Socrates
And you rhapsodes, for your part, interpret the utterances of the poets?
Ion
Again your words are true.
Socrates
And so you act as interpreters of interpreters?
Ion
Precisely.
Socrates
Stop now and tell me, Ion, without reserve what I may choose to ask you: when you give a good recitation and specially thrill your audience, either with the lay of Odysseus leaping forth on to the threshold, revealing himself to the suitors and pouring out the arrows before his feet, or of Achilles dashing at Hector, or some part of the sad story of Andromache or of Hecuba, or of Priam, are you then in your senses, or are you carried out of yourself, and does your soul in an ecstasy suppose herself to be among the scenes you are describing, whether they be in Ithaca, or in Troy, or as the poems may chance to place them?
Ion
How vivid to me, Socrates, is this part of your proof!
For I will tell you without reserve: when I relate a tale of woe, my eyes are filled with tears; and when it is of fear or awe, my hair stands on end with terror, and my heart leaps.
Socrates
Well now, are we to say, Ion, that such a person is in his senses at that moment, when in all the adornment of elegant attire and golden crowns he weeps at sacrifice or festival, having been despoiled of none of his finery; or shows fear as he stands before more than twenty thousand friendly people, none of whom is stripping or injuring him?
Ion
No, on my word, not at all, Socrates, to tell the strict truth.
Socrates
And are you aware that you rhapsodes produce these same effects on most of the spectators also?
Ion
Yes, very fully aware: for I look down upon them from the platform and see them at such moments crying and turning awestruck eyes upon me and yielding to the amazement of my tale.
For I have to pay the closest attention to them; since, if I set them crying, I shall laugh myself because of the money I take, but if they laugh, I myself shall cry because of the money I lose.
Socrates
And are you aware that your spectator is the last of the rings which I spoke of as receiving from each other the power transmitted from the Heraclean lodestone?
You, the rhapsode and actor, are the middle ring; the poet himself is the first; but it is the god who through the whole series draws the souls of men whithersoever he pleases, making the power of one depend on the other.
And, just as from the magnet, there is a mighty chain of choric performers and masters and under-masters suspended by side-connections from the rings that hang down from the Muse.
One poet is suspended from one Muse, another from another:
the word we use for it is "possessed," but it is much the same thing, for he is held.
And from these first rings the poets are suspended various others, which are thus inspired, some by Orpheus and others by Musaeus;
but the majority are possessed and held by Homer.
Of whom you, Ion, are one, and are possessed by Homer; and so, when anyone recites the work of another poet, you go to sleep and are at a loss what to say;
but when some one utters a strain of your poet, you wake up at once, and your soul dances, and you have plenty to say: for it is not by art or knowledge about Homer that you say what you say, but by divine dispensation and possession; just as the Corybantian worshippers are keenly sensible of that strain alone which belongs to the god whose possession is on them, and have plenty of gestures and phrases for that tune, but do not heed any other.
And so you, Ion, when the subject of Homer is mentioned, have plenty to say, but nothing on any of the others.
And when you ask me the reason why you can speak at large on Homer but not on the rest, I tell you it is because your skill in praising Homer comes not by art, but by divine dispensation.
Ion
Well spoken, I grant you, Socrates; but still I shall be surprised if you can speak well enough to convince me that I am possessed and mad when I praise Homer.
Nor can I think you would believe it of me yourself, if you heard me speaking about him.
Socrates
I declare I am quite willing to hear you, but not until you have first answered me this: on what thing in Homer's story do you speak well?
Not on all of them, I presume.
Ion
I assure you, Socrates, on all without a single exception.
Socrates
Not, of course, including those things of which you have in fact no knowledge, but which Homer tells.
Ion
And what sort of things are they, which Homer tells, but of which I have no knowledge?
Socrates
Why, does not Homer speak a good deal about arts, in a good many places?
For instance, about chariot-driving: if I can recall the lines, I will quote them to you.
Ion
No, I will recite them, for I can remember.
Socrates
Tell me then what Nestor says to his son Antilochus, advising him to be careful about the turning-post in the horse-race in honor of Patroclus.
Socrates
Enough.
Now, Ion, will a doctor or a charioteer be the better judge whether Homer speaks correctly or not in these lines?
Ion
A charioteer, of course.
Socrates
Because he has this art, or for some other reason?
Ion
No, because it is his art.
Socrates
And to every art has been apportioned by God a power of knowing a particular business?
For I take it that what we know by the art of piloting we cannot also know by that of medicine.
Ion
No, to be sure.
Socrates
And what we know by medicine, we cannot by carpentry also?
Ion
No, indeed.
Socrates
And this rule holds for all the arts, that what we know by one of them we cannot know by another?
But before you answer that, just tell me this: do you agree that one art is of one sort, and another of another?
Ion
Yes.
Socrates
Do you argue this as I do, and call one art different from another when one is a knowledge of one kind of thing, and another a knowledge of another kind?
Ion
Yes.
Socrates
Since, I suppose, if it were a knowledge of the same things how could we say that one was different from another, when both could give us the same knowledge?
Just as I know that there are five of these fingers, and you equally know the same fact about them; and if I should ask you whether both you and I know this same fact by the same art of numeration, or by different arts, you would reply, I presume, that it was by the same?
Ion
Yes.
Socrates
Then tell me now, what I was just going to ask you, whether you think this rule holds for all the arts that by the same art we must know the same things, and by a different art things that are not the same; but if the art is other, the things we know by it must be different also.
Ion
I think it is so, Socrates.
Socrates
Then he who has not a particular art will be incapable of knowing aright the words or works of that art?
Ion
True.
Socrates
Then will you or a charioteer be the better judge of whether Homer speaks well or not in the lines that you quoted?
Ion
A charioteer.
Socrates
Because, I suppose, you are a rhapsode and not a charioteer.
Ion
Yes.
Socrates
And the rhapsode's art is different from the charioteer's?
Ion
Yes.
Socrates
Then if it is different, it is also a knowledge of different things.
Ion
Yes.
Socrates
Now, what of the passage where Homer tells how Hecamede, Nestor's concubine, gives the wounded Machaon a posset?
His words are something like this: "Of Pramneian wine it was, and therein she grated cheese of goat's milk with a grater of bronze; and thereby an onion as a relish for drink.
Ion
For the doctor's.
Socrates
Well now, when Homer says:
are we to say it is for the fisherman's or for the rhapsode's art to decide what he means by this, and whether it is rightly or wrongly spoken?
Ion
Clearly, Socrates, for the fisherman's art.
Socrates
Then please observe:
suppose you were questioning me and should ask: "Since therefore, Socrates, you find it is for these several arts to appraise the passages of Homer that belong to each, be so good as to make out those also that are for the seer and the seer's art, and show me the sort of passages that come under his ability to distinguish whether they are well or ill done"; observe how easily and truly I shall answer you.
For he has many passages, both in the Odyssey, as for instance the words of Theoclymenus, the seer of the line of Melampus, to the suitors: "Hapless men, what bane is this afflicts you?
Your heads and faces and limbs below are shrouded in night, and wailing is enkindled, and cheeks are wet with tears: of ghosts the porch is full, and the court full of them also, hastening hell-wards 'neath the gloom: and the sun is perished out of heaven, and an evil mist is spread abroad;
and there are many passages in the Iliad also, as in the fight at the rampart, where he says:
This passage, and others of the sort, are those that I should say the seer has to examine and judge.
Ion
And you speak the truth, Socrates.
Socrates
And so do you, Ion, in saying that.
Now you must do as I did, and in return for my picking out from the Odyssey and the Iliad the kinds of passage that belong severally to the seer, the doctor, and the fisherman, you have now to pick out for me since you are so much more versed in Homer than I the kinds which belong to the rhapsode, Ion, and the rhapsode's art, and which he should be able to consider and distinguish beyond the rest of mankind.
Ion
What I say, Socrates, is "all passages."
Socrates
Surely you do not say "all," Ion!
Can you be so forgetful?
And yet forgetfulness would ill become a rhapsode.
Ion
Why, how am I forgetting?
Socrates
Do you not remember that you said that the art of the rhapsode was different from that of the charioteer?
Ion
I remember.
Socrates
And you also admitted that, being different, it would know different things?
Ion
Yes.
Socrates
Then by your own account the rhapsode's art cannot know everything, nor the rhapsode either.
Ion
Let us say, everything except those instances, Socrates.
Socrates
By "those instances" you imply the subjects of practically all the other arts.
Well, as he does not know all of them, which kinds will he know?
Ion
Those things, I imagine, that it befits a man to say, and the sort of thing that a woman should say; the sort for a slave and the sort for a freeman; and the sort for a subject or for a ruler.
Socrates
Do you mean that the rhapsode will know better than the pilot what sort of thing a ruler of a storm-tossed vessel at sea should say?
Ion
No, the pilot knows better in that case.
Socrates
Well, will the rhapsode know better than the doctor what sort of thing a ruler of a sick man should say?
Ion
Not in that case either.
Socrates
But he will know the sort for a slave, you say?
Ion
Yes.
Socrates
For instance, if the slave is a cowherd, you say the rhapsode will know what the other should say to pacify his cows when they get fierce, but the cowherd will not?
Ion
That is not so.
Socrates
Well, the sort of thing that a woman ought to say a spinning-woman about the working of wool?
Ion
No.
Socrates
But he will know what a man should say, when he is a general exhorting his men?
Ion
Yes, that sort of thing the rhapsode will know.
Socrates
Well, but is the art of the rhapsode the art of the general?
Ion
I, at any rate, should know what a general ought to say.
Socrates
Yes, since I daresay you are good at generalship also, Ion.
For in fact, if you happened to have skill in horsemanship as well as in the lyre, you would know when horses were well or ill managed: but if I asked you, "By which art is it, Ion, that you know that horses are being well managed;
by your skill as a horseman, or as a player of the lyre?"
what would your answer be?
Ion
I should say, by my skill as a horseman.
Socrates
And if again you were distinguishing the good lyre-players, you would admit that you distinguished by your skill in the lyre, and not by your skill as a horseman.
Ion
Yes.
Socrates
And when you judge of military matters, do you judge as having skill in generalship, or as a good rhapsode?
Ion
To my mind, there is no difference.
Socrates
What, no difference, do you say?
Do you mean that the art of the rhapsode and the general is one, not two?
Ion
It is one, to my mind.
Socrates
So that anyone who is a good rhapsode is also, in fact, a good general?
Ion
Certainly, Socrates.
Socrates
And again, anyone who happens to be a good general is also a good rhapsode.
Ion
No there I do not agree.
Socrates
But still you agree that anyone who is a good rhapsode is also a good general?
Ion
To be sure.
Socrates
And you are the best rhapsode in Greece?
Ion
Far the best, Socrates.
Socrates
Are you also, Ion, the best general in Greece?
Ion
Be sure of it, Socrates and that I owe to my study of Homer.
Socrates
Then how, in Heaven's name, can it be, Ion, that you, who are both the best general and the best rhapsode in Greece, go about performing as a rhapsode to the Greeks, but not as a general?
Or do you suppose that the Greeks feel a great need of a rhapsode in the glory of his golden crown, but of a general none at all?
Ion
It is because my city, Socrates, is under the rule and generalship of your people, and is not in want of a general; whilst you and Sparta would not choose me as a general, since you think you manage well enough for yourselves.
Socrates
My excellent Ion, you are acquainted with Apollodorus of Cyzicus, are you not?
Ion
What might he be?
Socrates
A man whom the Athenians have often chosen as their general, though a foreigner; and Phanosthenes of Andros, and Heracleides of Clazomenae, whom my city invests with the high command and other offices although they are foreigners, because they have proved themselves to be competent.
And will she not choose Ion of Ephesus as her general, and honor him, if he shows himself competent?
Why, you Ephesians are by origin Athenians, are you not, and Ephesus is inferior to no city?
But in fact, Ion, if you are right in saying it is by art and knowledge that you are able to praise Homer, you are playing me false: you have professed to me that you know any amount of fine things about Homer, and you promise to display them; but you are only deceiving me, and so far from displaying the subjects of your skill, you decline even to tell me what they are, for all my entreaties.
You are a perfect Proteus in the way you take on every kind of shape, twisting about this way and that, until at last you elude my grasp in the guise of a general, so as to avoid displaying your skill in Homeric lore.
Now if you are an artist and, as I was saying just now, you only promised me a display about Homer to deceive me, you are playing me false; whilst if you are no artist, but speak fully and finely about Homer, as I said you did, without any knowledge but by a divine dispensation which causes you to be possessed by the poet, you play quite fair.
Choose therefore which of the two you prefer us to call you, dishonest or divine.
Ion
The difference is great, Socrates; for it is far nobler to be called divine.
Socrates
Then you may count on this nobler title in our minds, Ion, of being a divine and not an artistic praiser of Homer.
Menexenus
Socrates
Menexenus
Socrates
From the agora, Menexenus, or where from?
Menexenus
From the agora, Socrates, and the Council Chamber.
Socrates
And what was it took you specially to the Council Chamber?
But of course it was because you deem yourself to be at the end of your education and philosophic studies, and being sufficiently versed, as you think, in these, you are minded to turn to graver matters; and you at your age, my marvellous youth, are attempting to govern us older men, lest your house should ever fail in providing us with a succession of managers.
Menexenus
Certainly if you, Socrates, allow and counsel me to govern, I shall do so gladly; but otherwise not.
This time, however, I went to the Council Chamber because I had learnt that the Council was going to select someone to make an oration over the dead; for you know that they propose to arrange for funeral rites.
Socrates
Yes, I do.
And whom did they select?
Menexenus
Nobody: they postponed it till tomorrow.
I fancy, however, that Archinus will be selected, or Dion.
Socrates
In truth, Menexenus, to fall in battle seems to be a splendid thing in many ways.
For a man obtains a splendid and magnificent funeral even though at his death he be but a poor man; and though he be but a worthless fellow, he wins praise, and that by the mouth of accomplished men who do not praise at random, but in speeches prepared long beforehand.
And they praise in such splendid fashion, that, what with their ascribing to each one both what he has and what he has not, and the variety and splendor of their diction, they bewitch our souls;
and they eulogize the State in every possible fashion, and they praise those who died in the war and all our ancestors of former times and ourselves who are living still; so that I myself, Menexenus, when thus praised by them feel mightily ennobled, and every time I listen fascinated I am exalted and imagine myself to have become all at once taller and nobler and more handsome.
And as I am generally accompanied by some strangers, who listen along with me, I become in their eyes also all at once more majestic; for they also manifestly share in my feelings with regard both to me and to the rest of our City, believing it to be more marvellous than before, owing to the persuasive eloquence of the speaker.
And this majestic feeling remains with me for over three days: so persistently does the speech and voice of the orator ring in my ears that it is scarcely on the fourth or fifth day that I recover myself and remember that I really am here on earth, whereas till then I almost imagined myself to be living in the Islands of the Blessed, so expert are our orators.
Menexenus
You are always deriding the orators, Socrates.
And truly I think that this time the selected speaker will not be too well prepared; for the selection is being made without warning, so that the speaker will probably be driven to improvise his speech.
Socrates
Why so, my good sir?
Each one of these men has speeches ready made; and what is more, it is in no wise difficult to improvise such things.
For if it were a question of eulogizing Athenians before an audience of Peloponnesians, or Peloponnesians before Athenians, there would indeed be need of a good orator to win credence and credit; but when a man makes his effort in the presence of the very men whom he is praising, it is no difficult matter to win credit as a fine speaker.
Menexenus
You think not, Socrates?
Socrates
Yes, by Zeus, I certainly do.
Menexenus
And do you think that you yourself would be able to make the speech, if required and if the Council were to select you?
Socrates
That I should be able to make the speech would be nothing wonderful, Menexenus; for she who is my instructor is by no means weak in the art of rhetoric; on the contrary, she has turned out many fine orators, and amongst them one who surpassed all other Greeks, Pericles, the son of Xanthippus.
Menexenus
Who is she?
But you mean Aspasia, no doubt.
Socrates
I do and; also Connus the son of Metrobius; for these are my two instructors, the one in music, the other in rhetoric.
So it is not surprising that a man who is trained like me should be clever at speaking.
But even a man less well taught than I, who had learnt his music from Lamprus and his rhetoric from Antiphon the Rhamnusian, even such a one, I say, could none the less win credit by praising Athenians before an Athenian audience.
Menexenus
What, then, would you have to say, if you were required to speak?
Socrates
Nothing, perhaps, myself of my own invention; but I was listening only yesterday to Aspasia going through a funeral speech for these very people.
For she had heard the report you mention, that the Athenians are going to select the speaker; and thereupon she rehearsed to me the speech in the form it should take, extemporizing in part, while other parts of it she had previously prepared, as I imagine, at the time when she was composing the funeral oration which Pericles delivered; and from this she patched together sundry fragments.
Menexenus
Could you repeat from memory that speech of Aspasia?
Socrates
Yes, if I am not mistaken; for I learnt it, to be sure, from her as she went along, and I nearly got a flogging whenever I forgot.
Menexenus
Why don't you repeat it then?
Socrates
But possibly my teacher will be vexed with me if I publish abroad her speech.
Menexenus
Never fear, Socrates; only tell it and you will gratify me exceedingly, whether it is Aspasia's that you wish to deliver or anyone else's; only say on.
Socrates
But you will probably laugh me to scorn if I, at my age, seem to you to be playing like a child.
Menexenus
Not at all, Socrates; but by all means say on.
Socrates
Nay, then, I must surely gratify; you for indeed I would almost gratify you if you were to bid me strip and dance, now that we two are alone.
Listen then.
In her speech, I believe, she began by making mention of the dead men themselves in this wise:
Socrates
I went down yesterday to the Peiraeus with Glaucon, the son of Ariston, to pay my devotions to the Goddess, and also because I wished to see how they would conduct the festival since this was its inauguration.
I thought the procession of the citizens very fine, but it was no better than the show, made by the marching of the Thracian contingent.
After we had said our prayers and seen the spectacle we were starting for town
when Polemarchus, the son of Cephalus, caught sight of us from a distance as we were hastening homeward and ordered his boy run and bid us to wait for him,
and the boy caught hold of my himation from behind and said,
"Polemarchus wants you to wait."
And I turned around and asked where his master was.
"There he is," he said, "behind you, coming this way.
Wait for him."
"So we will wait for him,"
said Glaucon,
and shortly after Polemarchus came up and Adeimantus, the brother of Glaucon, and Niceratus, the son of Nicias, and a few others apparently from the procession.
Whereupon Polemarchus said,
"Socrates, you appear to have turned your faces townward and to be going to leave us."
"Not a bad guess," said I.
"But you see how many we are?" he said.
"Surely."
"You must either then prove yourselves the better men or stay here."
"Why, is there not left," said I, "the alternative of our persuading you that you ought to let us go?"
"But could you persuade us," said he, "if we refused to listen?"
"Nohow," said Glaucon.
"Well, we won't listen, and you might as well make up your minds to it."
"Do you mean to say," interposed Adeimantus, "that you haven't heard that there is to be a torchlight race this evening on horseback in honor of the Goddess?"
"On horseback?"
said I.
"That is a new idea.
Will they carry torches and pass them along to one another as they race with the horses, or how do you mean?"
"That's the way of it," said Polemarchus,
"and, besides, there is to be a night festival which will be worth seeing.
For after dinner we will get up and go out and see the sights and meet a lot of the lads there and have good talk.
So stay and do as we ask."
"It looks as if we should have to stay," said Glaucon.
"Well," said I, "if it so be, so be it."
So we went with them to Polemarchus's house, and there we found Lysias and Euthydemus, the brothers of Polemarchus, yes, and Thrasymachus, too, of Chalcedon, and Charmantides of the deme of Paeania, and Kleitophon the son of Aristonymus. And the father of Polemarchus, Cephalus, was also at home.
And I thought him much aged, for it was a long time since I had seen him.
He was sitting on a sort of couch with cushions and he had a chaplet on his head, for he had just finished sacrificing in the court.
So we went and sat down beside him, for there were seats there disposed in a circle.
As soon as he saw me Cephalus greeted me and said,
"You are not a very frequent visitor, Socrates. You don't often come down to the Peiraeus to see us.
That is not right.
For if I were still able to make the journey up to town easily there would be no need of your resorting hither, but we would go to visit you.
But as it is you should not space too widely your visits here.
For I would have you know that, for my part, as the satisfactions of the body decay, in the same measure my desire for the pleasures of good talk and my delight in them increase.
Don't refuse then, but be yourself a companion to these lads and make our house your resort and regard us as your very good friends and intimates."
"Why, yes, Cephalus," said I, "and I enjoy talking with the very aged.
For to my thinking we have to learn of them as it were from wayfarers who have preceded us on a road on which we too, it may be, must some time fare what it is like is it rough and hard going or easy and pleasant to travel.
And so now I would fain learn of you what you think of this thing, now that your time has come to it, the thing that the poets call 'the threshold of old age.' Is it a hard part of life to bear or what report have you to make of it?"
"Yes, indeed, Socrates," he said, "I will tell you my own feeling about it.
For it often happens that some of us elders of about the same age come together and verify the old saw of like to like.
At these reunions most of us make lament, longing for the lost joys of youth and recalling to mind the pleasures of wine, women, and feasts, and other things thereto appertaining, and they repine in the belief that the greatest things have been taken from them and that then they lived well and now it is no life at all.
And some of them complain of the indignities that friends and kinsmen put upon old age and thereto recite a doleful litany of all the miseries for which they blame old age.
But in my opinion, Socrates, they do not put the blame on the real cause.
For if it were the cause I too should have had the same experience so far as old age is concerned, and so would all others who have come to this time of life.
But in fact I have ere now met with others who do not feel in this way, and in particular I remember hearing Sophocles the poet greeted by a fellow who asked, 'How about your service of Aphrodite, Sophocles is your natural force still unabated?'
And he replied, 'Hush, man, most gladly have I escaped this thing you talk of, as if I had run away from a raging and savage beast of a master.'
I thought it a good answer then and now I think so still more.
For in very truth there comes to old age a great tranquillity in such matters and a blessed release.
When the fierce tensions of the passions and desires relax, then is the word of Sophocles approved,
and we are rid of many and mad masters.
But indeed in respect of these complaints and in the matter of our relations with kinsmen and friends there is just one cause, Socrates not old age, but the character of the man.
For if men are temperate and cheerful even old age is only moderately burdensome.
But if the reverse, old age, Socrates, and youth are hard for such dispositions."
And I was filled with admiration for the man by these words, and desirous of hearing more I tried to draw him out and said,
"I fancy, Cephalus, that most people, when they hear you talk in this way, are not convinced but think that you bear old age lightly not because of your character but because of your wealth.
'For the rich,' they say, 'have many consolations.'"
"You are right," he said.
"They don't accept my view
and there is something in their objection, though not so much as they suppose.
But the retort of Themistocles comes in pat here, who, when a man from the little island of Seriphus grew abusive and told him that he owed his fame not to himself but to the city from which he came, replied that neither would he himself ever have made a name if he had been born in Seriphus nor the other if he had been an Athenian.
And the same principle applies excellently to those who not being rich take old age hard; for neither would the reasonable man find it altogether easy to endure old age conjoined with poverty, nor would the unreasonable man by the attainment of riches ever attain to self-contentment and a cheerful temper."
"May I ask, Cephalus," said I, "whether you inherited most of your possessions or acquired them yourself?"
"Acquired, eh?"
he said.
"As a moneymaker, I hold a place somewhere halfway between my grandfather and my father.
For my grandfather and namesake inherited about as much property as I now possess and multiplied it many times, my father Lysanias reduced it below the present amount,
and I am content if I shall leave the estate to these boys not less but by some slight measure more than my inheritance."
"The reason I asked," I said, is that you appear to me not to be over-fond of money. And that is generally the case with those who have not earned it themselves.
But those who have themselves acquired it have a double reason in comparison with other men for loving it.
For just as poets feel complacency about their own poems and fathers about their own sons, so men who have made money take this money seriously as their own creation and they also value it for its uses as other people do.
So they are hard to talk to since they are unwilling to commend anything except wealth."
"You are right," he replied.
"I assuredly am," said I.
"But tell me further this.
What do you regard as the greatest benefit you have enjoyed from the possession of property?"
"Something," he said, "which I might not easily bring many to believe if I told them.
For let me tell you, Socrates," he said, "that when a man begins to realize that he is going to die, he is filled with apprehensions and concern about matters that before did not occur to him.
The tales that are told of the world below and how the men who have done wrong here must pay the penalty there, though he may have laughed them down hitherto, then begin to torture his soul with the doubt that there may be some truth in them.
And apart from that the man himself either from the weakness of old age or possibly as being now nearer to the things beyond has a somewhat clearer view of them.
Be that as it may, he is filled with doubt, surmises, and alarms and begins to reckon up and consider whether he has ever wronged anyone.
Now he to whom the ledger of his life shows an account of many evil deeds starts up even from his dreams like children again and again in affright and his days are haunted by anticipations of worse to come.
But on him who is conscious of no wrong that he has done a sweet hope ever attends and a goodly to be nurse of his old age, as Pindar too says.
For a beautiful saying it is, Socrates, of the poet that when a man lives out his days in justice and piety sweet companion with him, to cheer his heart and nurse his old age, accompanies Hope, who chiefly rules the changeful mind of mortals.
That is a fine saying and an admirable.
It is for this, then, that I affirm that the possession of wealth is of most value not it may be to every man but to the good man.
Not to cheat any man even unintentionally or play him false, not remaining in debt to a god for some sacrifice or to a man for money, so to depart in fear to that other world to this result the possession of property contributes not a little.
It has also many other uses.
But, setting one thing against another, I would lay it down, Socrates, that for a man of sense this is the chief service of wealth."
"An admirable sentiment, Cephalus," said I.
"But speaking of this very thing, justice, are we to affirm thus without qualification that it is truth-telling and paying back what one has received from anyone, or may these very actions sometimes be just and sometimes unjust?
I mean, for example, as everyone I presume would admit, if one took over weapons from a friend who was in his right mind and then the lender should go mad and demand them back, that we ought not to return them in that case and that he who did so return them would not be acting justly nor yet would he who chose to speak nothing but the truth to one who was in that state."
"You are right," he replied.
"Then this is not the definition of justice: to tell the truth and return what one has received."
"Nay, but it is, Socrates," said Polemarchus breaking in, "if indeed we are to put any faith in Simonides."
"Very well," said Cephalus, "indeed I make over the whole argument to you.
For it is time for me to attend the sacrifices."
"Well," said I, "is not Polemarchus the heir of everything that is yours?"
"Certainly," said he with a laugh, and at the same time went out to the sacred rites.
"Tell me, then, you the inheritor of the argument, what it is that you affirm that Simonides says and rightly says about justice."
"That it is just," he replied, "to render to each his due.
In saying this I think he speaks well."
"I must admit," said I, "that it is not easy to disbelieve Simonides.
For he is a wise and inspired man.
But just what he may mean by this you, Polemarchus, doubtless know, but I do not.
Obviously he does not mean what we were just speaking of, this return of a deposit to anyone whatsoever even if he asks it back when not in his right mind.
And yet what the man deposited is due to him in a sense, is it not?"
"Yes."
"But rendered to him it ought not to be by any manner of means when he demands it not being his right mind."
"True," said he.
"It is then something other than this that Simonides must, as it seems, mean by the saying that it is just to render back what is due."
"Something else in very deed," he replied, "for he believes that friends owe it to friends to do them some good and no evil."
"I see," said I; "you mean that he does not render what is due or owing who returns a deposit of gold if this return and the acceptance prove harmful and the returner and the recipient are friends.
Isn't that what you say Simonides means?"
"Quite so."
"But how about this should one not render to enemies what is their due?"
"By all means," he said, "what is due and owing to them, and there is due and owing from an enemy to an enemy what also is proper for him, some evil."
"It was a riddling definition of justice, then, that Simonides gave after the manner of poets;
for while his meaning, it seems, was that justice is rendering to each what befits him, the name that he gave to this was the due.'"
"What else do you suppose?"
said he.
"In heaven's name!"
said I,
"suppose someone had questioned him thus:
'Tell me, Simonides, the art that renders what that is due and befitting to what is called the art of medicine.'
What do you take it would have been his answer?"
"Obviously," he said, "the art that renders to bodies drugs, foods, and drinks."
"And the art that renders to what things what that is due and befitting is called the culinary art?"
"Seasoning to meats."
"Good.In the same way tell me the art that renders what to whom would be denominated justice."
"If we are to follow the previous examples, Socrates, it is that which renders benefits and harms to friends and enemies."
"To do good to friends and evil to enemies, then, is justice in his meaning?"
"I think so."
"Who then is the most able when they are ill to benefit friends and harm enemies in respect to disease and health?"
"The physician."
"And who navigators in respect of the perils of the sea?"
"The pilot."
"Well then, the just man, in what action and for what work is he the most competent to benefit friends and harm enemies?"
"In making war and as an ally, I should say."
"Very well. But now if they are not sick, friend Polemarchus, the physician is useless to them."
"True."
"And so to those who are not at sea the pilot."
"Yes."
"Shall we also say this that for those who are not at war the just man is useless?"
"By no means."
"There is a use then even in peace for justice?"
"Yes, it is useful."
"But so is agriculture, isn't it?"
"Yes."
"Namely, for the getting of a harvest?"
"Yes."
"But likewise the cobbler's art?"
"Yes."
"Namely, I presume you would say, for the getting of shoes."
"Certainly."
"Then tell me, for the service and getting of what would you say that justice is useful in time of peace?"
"In engagements and dealings, Socrates."
"And by dealings do you mean associations, partnerships, or something else?"
"Associations, of course."
"Is it the just man, then, who is a good and useful associate and partner in the placing of draughts or the draught-player?"
"The player."
"And in the placing of bricks and stones is the just man a more useful and better associate than the builder?"
"By no means."
"Then what is the association in which the just man is a better partner than the harpist as an harpist is better than the just man for striking the chords?"
"For money-dealings, I think."
"Except, I presume, Polemarchus, for the use of money when there is occasion to buy in common or sell a horse.
Then, I take it, the man who knows horses, isn't it so?"
"Apparently."
"And again, if it is a vessel, the shipwright or the pilot."
"It would seem so."
"What then is the use of money in common for which a just man is the better partner?"
"When it is to be deposited and kept safe, Socrates."
"You mean when it is to be put to no use but is to lie idle?"
"Quite so."
"Then it is when money is useless that justice is useful in relation to it?"
"It looks that way."
"And similarly when a scythe is to be kept safe, then justice is useful both in public and private. But when it is to be used, the vinedresser's art is useful?"
"Apparently."
"And so you will have to say that when a shield and a lyre are to be kept and put to no use, justice is useful, but when they are to be made use of, the military art and music."
"Necessarily."
"And so in all other cases, in the use of each thing, justice is useless but in its uselessness useful?"
"It looks that way."
"Then, my friend, justice cannot be a thing of much worth if it is useful only for things out of use and useless.
But let us consider this point.
Is not the man who is most skillful to strike or inflict a blow in a fight, whether as a boxer or elsewhere, also the most wary to guard against a blow?"
"Assuredly."
"Is it not also true that he who best knows how to guard against disease is also most cunning to communicate it and escape detection?"
"I think so."
"But again the very same man is a good guardian of an army who is good at stealing a march upon the enemy in respect of their designs and proceedings generally."
"Certainly."
"Of whatsoever, then, anyone is a skillful guardian, of that he is also a skillful thief?"
"It seems so."
"If then the just man is an expert in guarding money he is an expert in stealing it."
"The argument certainly points that way."
"A kind of thief then the just man it seems has turned out to be, and it is likely that you acquired this idea from Homer.
For he regards with complacency Autolycus, the maternal uncle of Odysseus, and says
"'he was gifted beyond all men in thievery and perjury.'"
So justice, according to you and Homer and Simonides, seems to be a kind of stealing, with the qualification that it is for the benefit of friends and the harm of enemies.
Isn't that what you meant?"
"No, by Zeus," he replied.
"I no longer know what I did mean.
Yet this I still believe, that justice benefits friends and harms enemies."
"May I ask whether by friends you mean those who seem to a man to be worthy or those who really are so, even if they do not seem, and similarly of enemies?"
"It is likely," he said, "that men will love those whom they suppose to be good and dislike those whom they deem bad."
"Do not men make mistakes in this matter so that many seem good to them who are not and the reverse?"
"They do make mistakes."
"For those, then, who thus err the good are their enemies and the bad their friends?"
"Certainly."
"But all the same is then just for them to benefit the bad and injure the good?"
"It would seem so."
"But again the good are just and incapable of injustice."
"True."
"On your reasoning then it is just to wrong those who do no injustice."
"Nay, nay, Socrates," he said, "the reasoning can't be right."
"Then," said I, "it is just to harm the unjust and benefit the just."
"That seems a better conclusion than the other."
"It will work out, then, for many, Polemarchus, who have misjudged men that it is just to harm their friends, for they have got bad ones, and to benefit their enemies, for they are good.
And so we shall find ourselves saying the very opposite of what we affirmed Simonides to mean."
"Most certainly," he said, "it does work out so.
But let us change our ground; for it looks as if we were wrong in the notion we took up about the friend and the enemy."
"What notion, Polemarchus?"
"That the man who seems to us good is the friend."
"And to what shall we change it now?" said I.
"That the man who both seems and is good is the friend, but that he who seems but is not really so seems but is not really the friend.
And there will be the same assumption about the enemy."
"Then on this view it appears the friend will be the good man and the bad the enemy."
"Yes."
"So you would have us qualify our former notion of the just man by an addition. We then said it was just to do good to a friend and evil to an enemy, but now we are to add that it is just to benefit the friend if he is good and harm the enemy if he is bad?"
"By all means," he said, "that, I think, would be the right way to put it."
"Is it then," said I, "the part of a good man to harm anybody whatsoever?"
"Certainly it is," he replied; "a man ought to harm those who are both bad and his enemies."
"When horses are harmed does it make them better or worse?"
"Worse."
"In respect of the excellence or virtue of dogs or that of horses?"
"Of horses."
"And do not also dogs when harmed become worse in respect of canine and not of equine virtue?"
"Necessarily."
"And men, my dear fellow, must we not say that when they are harmed it is in respect of the distinctive excellence or virtue of man that they become worse?"
"Assuredly."
"And is not justice the specific virtue of man?"
"That too must be granted."
"Then it must also be admitted, my friend, that men who are harmed become more unjust."
"It seems so."
"Do musicians then make men unmusical by the art of music?"
"Impossible."
"Well, do horsemen by horsemanship unfit men for dealing with horses?"
"No."
"By justice then do the just make men unjust, or in sum do the good by virtue make men bad?"
"Nay, it is impossible."
"It is not, I take it, the function of heat to chill but of its opposite."
"Yes."
"Nor of dryness to moisten but of its opposite."
"Assuredly."
"Nor yet of the good to harm but of its opposite."
"So it appears."
"But the just man is good?"
"Certainly."
"It is not then the function of the just man, Polemarchus, to harm either friend or anyone else, but of his opposite."
"I think you are altogether right, Socrates."
"If, then, anyone affirms that it is just to render to each his due and he means by this, that injury and harm is what is due to his enemies from the just man and benefits to his friends, he was no truly wise man who said it.
For what he meant was not true.
For it has been made clear to us that in no case is it just to harm anyone."
"I concede it,"
he said.
"We will take up arms against him, then," said I, "you and I together, if anyone affirms that either Simonides or Bias or Pittacus or any other of the wise and blessed said such a thing."
"I, for my part," he said, "am ready to join in the battle with you."
"Do you know," said I, "to whom I think the saying belongs this statement that it is just to benefit friends and harm enemies?"
"To whom?"
he said.
"I think it was the saying of Periander or Perdiccas or Xerxes or Ismenias the Theban or some other rich man who had great power in his own conceit."
"That is most true," he replied.
"Very well," said I,
"since it has been made clear that this too is not justice and the just, what else is there that we might say justice to be?"
Now Thrasymachus, even while we were conversing, had been trying several times to break in and lay hold of the discussion but he was restrained by those who sat by him who wished to hear the argument out.
But when we came to a pause after I had said this, he couldn't any longer hold his peace.
But gathering himself up like a wild beast he hurled himself upon us as if he would tear us to pieces.
And Polemarchus and I were frightened and fluttered apart,
and he bawled out into our midst, "What balderdash is this that you have been talking,
and why do you all act foolish and give way to one another?
But if you really wish, to know what the just is, don't merely ask questions or plume yourself upon controverting any answer that anyone gives since your acumen has perceived that it is easier to ask questions than to answer them, but do you yourself answer and tell what you say the just is.
And don't you be telling me that it is that which ought to be, or the beneficial or the profitable or the gainful or the advantageous, but express clearly and precisely whatever you say.
For I won't take from you any such drivel as that!"
And I, when I heard him, was dismayed, and looking upon him was filled with fear,
and I believe that if I had not looked at him before he did at me I should have lost my voice.
But as it is, at the very moment when he began to be exasperated by the course of the argument I glanced at him first, so that I became capable of answering him and said with a light tremor:
"Thrasymachus, don't be harsh with us.
If I and my friend have made mistakes in the consideration of the question, rest assured that it is unwillingly that we err.
For you surely must not suppose that while if our quest were for gold we would never willingly submit to one another and make concessions in the search and so spoil our chances of finding it, yet that when we are searching for justice, a thing more precious than much fine gold, we should then be so foolish as to give way to one another and not rather do our serious best to have it discovered.
You surely must not suppose that, my friend.
But you see it is our lack of ability that is at fault.
It is pity then that we should far more reasonably receive from clever fellows like you than severity."
And he on hearing this gave a great guffaw and laughed sardonically and said,
here we have the well-known irony of Socrates,
and I knew it and predicted that when it came to replying you would refuse and dissemble and do anything rather than answer any question that anyone asked you."
"That's because you are wise, Thrasymachus,
and so you knew very well that if you asked a man how many are twelve, and in putting the question warned him:
don't you be telling me, fellow, that twelve is twice six or three times four or six times two or four times three, for I won't accept any such drivel as that from you as an answer
it was obvious I fancy to you that no one could give an answer to a question framed in that fashion.
Suppose he had said to you,
'Thrasymachus, what do you mean?
Am I not to give any of the prohibited answers, not even, do you mean to say, if the thing really is one of these, but must I say something different from the truth, or what do you mean?'
What would have been your answer to him?"
"Humph!" said he, "how very like the two cases are!"
"There is nothing to prevent," said I; "yet even granted that they are not alike, yet if it appears to the person asked the question that they are alike, do you suppose that he will any the less answer what appears to him, whether we forbid him or whether we don't?"
"Is that, then," said he, "what you are going to do?
Are you going to give one of the forbidden answers?"
"I shouldn't be surprised," I said, "if on reflection that would be my view."
"What then," he said, "if I show you another answer about justice differing from all these, a better one
what penalty do you think you deserve?"
"Why, what else," said I, "than that which it befits anyone who is ignorant to suffer?
It befits him, I presume, to learn from the one who does know.
That then is what I propose that I should suffer."
"I like your simplicity," said he;
"but in addition to 'learning' you must pay a fine of money."
"Well, I will when I have got it," I said.
"It is there,"
said Glaucon:
"if money is all that stands in the way, Thrasymachus, go on with your speech.
We will all contribute for Socrates."
"Oh yes, of course," said he, "so that Socrates may contrive, as he always does, to evade answering himself but may cross-examine the other man and refute his replies."
"Why, how," I said, "my dear fellow, could anybody answer if in the first place he did not know and did not even profess to know, and secondly even if he had some notion of the matter, he had been told by a man of weight that he mustn't give any of his suppositions as an answer?
Nay, it is more reasonable that you should be the speaker.
For you do affirm that you know and are able to tell.
Don't be obstinate, but do me the favor to reply and don't be chary of your wisdom, and instruct Glaucon here and the rest of us."
When I had spoken thus Glaucon and the others urged him not to be obstinate.
It was quite plain that Thrasymachus was eager to speak in order that he might do himself credit, since he believed that he had a most excellent answer to our question.
But he demurred and pretended to make a point of my being the respondent.
Finally he gave way and then said,
"Here you have the wisdom of Socrates, to refuse himself to teach, but go about and learn from others and not even pay thanks therefor."
"That I learn from others," I said, "you said truly, Thrasymachus. But in saying that I do not pay thanks you are mistaken.
I pay as much as I am able.
And I am able only to bestow praise.
For money I lack.
But that I praise right willingly those who appear to speak well you will well know forthwith as soon as you have given your answer.
For I think that you will speak well."
"Hearken and hear then," said he.
"I affirm that the just is nothing else than the advantage of the stronger.
WeIl, why don't you applaud?
Nay, you'll do anything but that."
"Provided only I first understand your meaning," said I;
"for I don't yet apprehend it.
The advantage of the stronger is what you affirm the just to be.
But what in the world do you mean by this?
I presume you don't intend to affirm this, that if Polydamas the pancratiast is stronger than we are and the flesh of cattle is advantageous for him, for his body, this food is also for us who are weaker than he both advantageous and just."
"You're a buffoon, Socrates, and take my statement in the most detrimental sense."
"Not at all, my dear fellow" said I;
"I only want you to make your meaning plainer."
"Don't you know then," said he, "that some cities are governed by tyrants, in others democracy rules, in others aristocracy?"
"Assuredly."
"And is not this the thing that is strong and has the mastery in each the ruling party?"
"Certainly."
"And each form of government enacts the laws with a view to its own advantage, a democracy democratic laws and tyranny autocratic and the others likewise, and by so legislating they proclaim that the just for their subjects is that which is for their the rulers' advantage and the man who deviates from this law they chastise as a law-breaker and a wrongdoer.
This, then, my good sir, is what I understand as the identical principle of justice that obtains in all states the advantage of the established government.
This I presume you will admit holds power and is strong, so that, if one reasons rightly, it works out that the just is the same thing everywhere, the advantage of the stronger."
"Now," said I, "I have learned your meaning,
but whether it is true or not I have to try to learn.
The advantageous, then, is also your reply, Thrasymachus, to the question, what is the just though you forbade me to give that answer. But you add thereto that of the stronger."
"A trifling addition perhaps you think it," he said.
"It is not yet clear whether it is a big one either; but that we must inquire whether what you say is true, is clear.
For since I too admit that the just is something that is of advantage but you are for making an addition and affirm it to be the advantage of the stronger, while I don't profess to know, we must pursue the inquiry."
"Inquire away,"
he said.
"I will do so,"
said I.
"Tell me, then;
you affirm also, do you not, that obedience to rulers is just?"
"I do."
"May I ask whether the rulers in the various states are infallible or capable sometimes of error?"
"Surely," he said, "they are liable to err."
"Then in their attempts at legislation they enact some laws rightly and some not rightly, do they not?"
"So I suppose."
"And by rightly we are to understand for their advantage, and by wrongly to their disadvantage?
Do you mean that or not?"
"That."
"But whatever they enact must be performed by their subjects and is justice?"
"Of course."
"Then on your theory it is just not only to do what is the advantage of the stronger but also the opposite, what is not to his advantage."
"What's that you're saying?"
he replied.
"What you yourself are saying, I think.
Let us consider it more closely.
Have we not agreed that the rulers in giving orders to the ruled sometimes mistake their own advantage, and that whatever the rulers enjoin is just for the subjects to perform?
Was not that admitted?"
"I think it was,"
he replied.
"Then you will have to think," I said, "that to do what is disadvantageous to the rulers and the stronger has been admitted by you to be just in the case when the rulers unwittingly enjoin what is bad for themselves, while you affirm that it is just for the others to do what they enjoined.
In that way does not this conclusion inevitably follow, my most sapient Thrasymachus, that it is just to do the very opposite of what you say?
For it is in that case surely the disadvantage of the stronger or superior that the inferior are commanded to perform."
"Yes, by Zeus, Socrates," said Polemarchus, "nothing could be more conclusive."
"Of course," said Cleitophon, breaking in, "if you are his witness."
"What need is there of a witness?" he said.
"Thrasymachus himself admits that the rulers sometimes enjoin what is evil for themselves and yet says that it is just for the subjects to do this."
"That, Polemarchus, is because Thrasymachus laid it down that it is just to obey the orders of the rulers."
"Yes, Cleitophon, but he also took the position that the advantage of the stronger is just.
And after these two assumptions he again admitted that the stronger sometimes bid the inferior and their subjects do what is to the disadvantage of the rulers.
And from these admissions the just would no more be the advantage of the stronger than the contrary."
"O well," said Cleitophon, "by the advantage of the superior he meant what the superior supposed to be for his advantage.
This was what the inferior had to do, and that this is the just was his position."
"That isn't what he said," replied Polemarchus.
"Never mind, Polemarchus," said I, "but if that is Thrasymachus's present meaning, let us take it from him in that sense.
So tell me, Thrasymachus,
was this what you intended to say, that the just is the advantage of the superior as it appears to the superior whether it really is or not?
Are we to say this was your meaning?"
"Not in the least," he said.
"Do you suppose that I call one who is in error a superior when he errs?"
"I certainly did suppose that you meant that," I replied, "when you agreed that rulers are not infallible but sometimes make mistakes."
"That is because you argue like a pettifogger, Socrates.
Why, to take the nearest example, do you call one who is mistaken about the sick a physician in respect of his mistake or one who goes wrong in a calculation a calculator when he goes wrong and in respect of this error?
Yet that is what we say literally we say that the physician erred and the calculator and the schoolmaster.
But the truth, I take it, is, that each of these in so far as he is that which we entitle him never errs; so that, speaking precisely, since you are such a stickler for precision, no craftsman errs.
For it is when his knowledge abandons him that he who goes wrong goes wrong when he is not a craftsman.
So that no craftsman, wise man, or ruler makes a mistake then when he is a ruler, though everybody would use the expression that the physician made a mistake and the ruler erred.
It is in this loose way of speaking, then, that you must take the answer I gave you a little while ago.
But the most precise statement is that other, that the ruler in so far forth as ruler does not err, and not erring he enacts what is best for himself, and this the subject must do, so that, even as I meant from the start, I say the just is to do what is for the advantage of the stronger."
"So then, Thrasymachus," said I,
"my manner of argument seems to you pettifogging?"
"It does,"
he said.
"You think, do you, that it was with malice aforethought and trying to get the better of you unfairly that I asked that question?"
"I don't think it, I know it,"
he said,
"and you won't make anything by it, for you won't get the better of me by stealth and , failing stealth, you are not of the force to beat me in debate."
"Blessed one," said I, "I wouldn't even attempt such a thing.
But that nothing of the sort may spring up between us again, define in which sense you take the ruler and stronger.
Do you mean the so-called ruler or that ruler in the precise sense of whom you were just now telling us, and for whose advantage as being the superior it will be just for the inferior to act?"
"I mean the ruler in the very most precise sense of the word," he said.
"Now bring on against this your petty objections and your shyster's tricks if you are able.
I ask no quarter.
But you'll find yourself unable."
"Why, do you suppose," I said, "that I am so mad to try to try to beard a lion and try the pettifogger on Thrasymachus?"
"You did try it just now," he said, "paltry fellow though you be."
"Something too much of this sort of thing," said I.
"But tell me,
your physician in the precise sense of whom you were just now speaking, is he a moneymaker, an earner of fees, or a healer of the sick?
And remember to speak of the physician who is really such."
"A healer of the sick," he replied.
"And what of the lot the pilot rightly so called is he a ruler of sailors or a sailor?"
"A ruler of sailors."
"We don't, I fancy, have to take into account the fact that he actually sails in the ship, nor is he to be denominated a sailor.
For it is not in respect of his sailing that he is called a pilot but in respect of his art and his ruling of the sailors."
"True,"
he said.
"Then for each of them is there not a something that is for his advantage?"
"Quite so."
"And is it not also true," said I, "that the art naturally exists for this, to discover and provide for each his advantage?"
"Yes, for this."
"Is there, then, for each of the arts any other advantage than to be perfect as possible?"
"What do you mean by that question?"
"Just as if," I said, "you should ask me whether it is enough for the body to be the body or whether it stands in need of something else, I would reply, 'By all means it stands in need.
That is the reason why the art of medicine has now been invented, because the body is defective and such defect is unsatisfactory.
To provide for this, then, what is advantageous, that is the end for which the art was devised.'
Do you think that would be a correct answer, or not?"
"Correct,"
he said.
"But how about this?
Is the medical art itself defective or faulty,
or has any other art any need of some virtue, quality, or excellence as the eyes of vision, the ears of hearing,
and for this reason is there need of some art over them that will consider and provide what is advantageous for these very ends
does there exist in the art itself some defect
and does each art require another art to consider its advantage
and is there need of still another for the considering art and so on ad infinitum,
or will the art look out for its own advantage?
Or is it a fact that it needs neither itself nor another art to consider its advantage and provide against its deficiency?
For there is no defect or error at all that dwells in any art.
Nor does it befit an art to seek the advantage of anything else than that of its object.
But the art itself is free from all harm and admixture of evil, and is right so long as each art is precisely and entirely that which it is.
And consider the matter in that precise way of speaking.
Is it so or not?"
"It appears to be so," he said.
"Then medicine," said I, "does not consider the advantage of medicine but of the body?"
"Yes."
"Nor horsemanship of horsemanship but of horses, nor does any other art look out for itself for it has no need but for that of which it is the art."
"So it seems," he replied.
"But surely, Thrasymachus, the arts do hold rule and are stronger than that of which they are the arts."
He conceded this but it went very hard.
"Then no art considers or enjoins the advantage of the stronger but every art that of the weaker which is ruled by it."
This too he was finally brought to admit though he tried to contest it.
But when he had agreed
"Can we deny, then," said I, "that neither does any physician in so far as he is a physician seek or enjoin the advantage of the physician but that of the patient?
For we have agreed that the physician, 'precisely' speaking, is a ruler and governor of bodies and not a moneymaker.
Did we agree on that?"
He assented.
"And so the 'precise' pilot is a ruler of sailors, not a sailor?"
That was admitted.
"Then that sort of a pilot and ruler will not consider and enjoin the advantage of the pilot but that of the sailor whose ruler he is."
He assented reluctantly.
"Then," said I, "Thrasymachus, neither does anyone in any office of rule in so far as he is a ruler consider and enjoin his own advantage but that of the one whom he rules and for whom he exercises his craft, and he keeps his eyes fixed on that and on what is advantageous and suitable to that in all that he says and does."
When we had come to this point in the discussion and it was apparent to everybody that his formula of justice had suffered a reversal of form,
Thrasymachus, instead of replying, said, "Tell me, Socrates, have you got a nurse?"
"What do you mean?"
said I.
"Why didn't you answer me instead of asking such a question?"
"Because," he said, "she lets her little 'snotty' run about drivelling and doesn't wipe your face clean, though you need it badly, if she can't get you to know the difference between the shepherd and the sheep."
"And what, pray, makes you think that?"
said I.
"Because you think that the shepherds and the neat-herds are considering the good of the sheep and the cattle and fatten and tend them with anything else in view than the good of their masters and themselves;
and by the same token you seem to suppose that the rulers in our cities, I mean the real rulers, differ at all in their thoughts of the governed from a man's attitude towards his sheep or that they think of anything else night and day than the sources of their own profit.
And you are so far out concerning the just and justice and the unjust and injustice that you don't know that justice and the just are literally the other fellow's good the advantage of the stronger and the ruler, but a detriment that is all his own of the subject who obeys and serves;
while injustice is the contrary and rules those who are simple in every sense of the word and just,
and they being thus ruled do what is for his advantage who is the stronger and make him happy in serving him, but themselves by no manner of means.
And you must look at the matter, my simple-minded Socrates, in this way: that the just man always comes out at a disadvantage in his relation with the unjust.
To begin with, in their business dealings in any joint undertaking of the two you will never find that the just man has the advantage over the unjust at the dissolution of the partnership but that he always has the worst of it.
Then again, in their relations with the state, if there are direct taxes or contributions to be paid, the just man contributes more from an equal estate and the other less,
and when there is a distribution the one gains much and the other nothing.
And so when each holds office, apart from any other loss the just man must count on his own affairs falling into disorder through neglect,
while because of his justice makes no profit from the state, and thereto he will displease his friends and his acquaintances by his unwillingness to serve them unjustly.
But to the unjust man all the opposite advantages accrue.
I mean, of course, the one I was just speaking of, the man who has the ability to overreach on a large scale.
Consider this type of man, then,
if you wish to judge how much more profitable it is to him personally to be unjust than to be just.
And the easiest way of all to understand this matter will be to turn to the most consummate form of injustice which makes the man who has done the wrong most happy and those who are wronged and who would not themselves willingly do wrong most miserable.
And this is tyranny, which both by stealth and by force takes away what belongs to others, both sacred and profane, both private and public, not little by little but at one swoop.
For each several part of such wrongdoing the malefactor who fails to escape detection is fined and incurs the extreme of contumely;
for temple-robbers, kidnappers, burglars, swindlers, and thieves the appellations of those who commit these partial forms of injustice.
But when in addition to the property of the citizens men kidnap and enslave the citizens themselves, instead of these opprobrious names they are pronounced happy and blessed not only by their fellow-citizens but by all who hear the story of the man who has committed complete and entire injustice.
For it is not the fear of doing but of suffering wrong that calls forth the reproaches of those who revile injustice.
Thus, Socrates, injustice on a sufficiently large scale is a stronger, freer, and a more masterful thing than justice,
and, as I said in the beginning, it is the advantage of the stronger that is the just, while the unjust is what profits man's self and is for his advantage."
After this Thrasymachus was minded to depart when like a bathman he had poured his speech in a sudden flood over our ears.
But the company would not suffer him and were insistent that he should remain and render an account of what he had said.
And I was particularly urgent and said,
"I am surprised at you, Thrasymachus; after hurling such a doctrine at us, can it be that you propose to depart without staying to teach us properly or learn yourself whether this thing is so or not?
Do you think it is a small matter that you are attempting to determine and not the entire conduct of life that for each of us would make living most worth while?"
"Well, do I deny it?" said Thrasymachus.
"You seem to," said I,
"or else to care nothing for us and so feel no concern whether we are going to live worse or better lives in our ignorance of what you affirm that you know.
Nay, my good fellow, do your best to make the matter clear to us also:
it will be no bad investment for you any benefit that you bestow on such company as this.
For I tell you for my part that I am not convinced, neither do I think that injustice is more profitable than justice, not even if one gives it free scope and does not hinder it of its will.
But, suppose, sir, a man to be unjust and to be able to act unjustly either because he is not detected or can maintain it by violence, all the same he does not convince me that it is more profitable than justice.
Now it may be that there is someone else among us who feels in this way and that I am not the only one.
Persuade us, then, my dear fellow, convince us satisfactorily that we are ill advised in preferring justice to injustice."
"And how am I to persuade you?" he said.
"If you are not convinced by what I just now was saying, what more can I do for you?
Shall I take the argument and ram it into your head?"
"Heaven forbid!"
I said,
"don't do that.
But in the first place when you have said a thing stand by it, or if you shift your ground change openly and don't try to deceive us.
But, as it is, you see, Thrasymachus let us return to the previous examples you see that while you began by taking the physician in the true sense of the word, you did not think fit afterwards to be consistent and maintain with precision the notion of the true shepherd,
but you apparently think that he herds his sheep in his quality of shepherd not with regard to what is best for the sheep but as if he were a banqueter about to be feasted with regard to the good cheer or again with a view to the sale of them as if he were a money-maker and not a shepherd.
But the art of the shepherd surely is concerned with nothing else than how to provide what is best for that over which is set,
since its own affairs, its own best estate, are entirely sufficiently provided for so long as it in nowise fails of being the shepherd's art.
And in like manner I supposed that we just now were constrained to acknowledge that every form of rule in so far as it is rule considers what is best for nothing else than that which is governed and cared for by it, alike in political and private rule.
Why, do you think that the rulers and holders of office in our cities the true rulers willingly hold office and rule?"
"I don't think," he said, "I know right well they do."
"But what of other forms of rule, Thrasymachus?
Do you not perceive that no one chooses of his own will to hold the office of rule,
but they demand pay, which implies that not to them will benefit accrue from their holding office but to those whom they rule?
For tell me this:
we ordinarily say, do we not, that each of the arts is different from others because its power or function is different?
And, my dear fellow, in order that we may reach some result, don't answer counter to your real belief."
"Well, yes," he said, "that is what renders it different."
And does not each art also yield us benefit that is peculiar to itself and not general, as for example medicine health, the pilot's art safety at sea, and the other arts similarly?"
"Assuredly."
"And does not the wage-earner's art yield wage?
For that is its function.
Would you identify medicine and the pilot's art?
Or if you please to discriminate 'precisely' as you proposed, none the more if a pilot regains his health because a sea voyage is good for him, no whit the more, I say, for this reason do you call his art medicine, do you?"
"Of course not,"
he said.
"Neither, I take it, do you call wage-earning medicine if a man earning wages is in health."
"Surely not."
"But what of this?
Do you call medicine wage-earning, if a man when giving treatment earns wages?"
"No," he said.
"And did we not agree that the benefit derived from each art is peculiar to it?"
"So be it,"
he said.
"Any common or general benefit that all craftsmen receive, then, they obviously derive from their common use of some further identical thing."
"It seems so,"
he said.
"And we say that the benefit of earning wages accrues to the craftsmen from their further exercise of the wage-earning art."
He assented reluctantly.
"Then the benefit, the receiving of wages does not accrue to each from his own art.
But if we are to consider it 'precisely' medicine produces health but the fee-earning art the pay, and architecture a house but the fee-earning art accompanying it the fee, and so with all the others, each performs its own task and benefits that over which it is set,
but unless pay is added to it is there any benefit which the craftsman receives from the craft?"
"Apparently not,"
he said.
"Does he then bestow no benefit either when he works for nothing?"
"I'll say he does."
"Then, Thrasymachus, is not this immediately apparent, that no art or office provides what is beneficial for itself
but as we said long ago it provides and enjoins what is beneficial to its subject, considering the advantage of that, the weaker, and not the advantage the stronger?
That was why, friend Thrasymachus, I was just now saying that no one of his own will chooses to hold rule and office and take other people's troubles in hand to straighten them out,
but everybody expects pay for that, because he who is to exercise the art rightly never does what is best for himself or enjoins it when he gives commands according to the art, but what is best for the subject.
That is the reason, it seems, why pay must be provided for those who are to consent to rule, either in form of money or honor or a penalty if they refuse."
"What do you mean by that, Socrates?"
said Glaucon.
"The two wages I recognize, but the penalty you speak of and described as a form of wage I don't understand."
"Then," said I, "you don't understand the wages of the best men for the sake of which the finest spirits hold office and rule when they consent to do so.
Don't you know that to be covetous of honor and covetous of money is said to be and is a reproach?"
"I do,"
he said.
"Well, then," said I, "that is why the good are not willing to rule either for the sake of money or of honor.
They do not wish to collect pay openly for their service of rule and be styled hirelings nor to take it by stealth from their office and be called thieves, nor yet for the sake of honor,
for they are not covetous of honor.
So there must be imposed some compulsion and penalty to constrain them to rule if they are to consent to hold office.
That is perhaps why to seek office oneself and not await compulsion is thought disgraceful.
But the chief penalty is to be governed by someone worse if a man will not himself hold office and rule.
It is from fear of this, as it appears to me, that the better sort hold office when they do, and then they go to it not in the expectation of enjoyment nor as to a good thing, but as to a necessary evil and because they are unable to turn it over to better men than themselves or to their like.
For we may venture to say that, if there should be a city of good men only, immunity from office-holding would be as eagerly contended for as office is now, and there it would be made plain that in very truth the true ruler does not naturally seek his own advantage but that of the ruled;
so that every man of understanding would rather choose to be benefited by another than to be bothered with benefiting him.
This point then I by no means concede to Thrasymachus, that justice is the advantage of the superior.
But that we will reserve for another occasion.
A far weightier matter seems to me Thrasymachus's present statement, his assertion that the life of the unjust man is better than that of the just.
Which now do you choose, Glaucon?" said I,
"and which seems to you to be the truer statement?"
"That the life of the just man is more profitable, I say."
"Did you hear," said I, "all the goods that Thrasymachus just now enumerated for the life of the unjust man?"
"I heard," he said, "but I am not convinced."
"Do you wish us then to try to persuade him, supposing we can find a way, that what he says is not true?"
"Of course I wish it,"
he said.
"If then we oppose him in a set speech enumerating in turn the advantages of being just and he replies and we rejoin, we shall have to count up and measure the goods listed in the respective speeches and we shall forthwith be in need of judges to decide between us.
But if, as in the preceding discussion, we come to terms with one another as to what we admit in the inquiry, we shall be ourselves both judges and pleaders."
"Quite so,"
he said.
"Which method do you like best?" said I.
"This one,"
he said.
"Come then, Thrasymachus," I said, "go back to the beginning and answer us.
You affirm that perfect and complete injustice is more profitable than justice that is complete."
"I affirm it," he said, "and have told you my reasons."
"Tell me then how you would express yourself on this point about them.
You call one of them, I presume, a virtue and the other a vice?"
"Of course."
"Justice the virtue and injustice the vice?"
"It is likely, you innocent, when I say that injustice pays and justice doesn't pay."
"But what then, pray?"
"The opposite,"
he replied.
"What! justice vice?"
"No, but a most noble simplicity or goodness of heart."
"Then do you call injustice badness of heart?"
"No, but goodness of judgement."
"Do you also, Thrasymachus, regard the unjust as intelligent and good?"
"Yes, if they are capable of complete injustice," he said, "and are able to subject to themselves cities and tribes of men.
But you probably suppose that I mean those who take purses.
There is profit to be sure even in that sort of thing," he said, "if it goes undetected.
But such things are not worth taking into the account, but only what I just described."
"I am not unaware of your meaning in that," I said; "but this is what surprised me, that you should range injustice under the head of virtue and wisdom, and justice in the opposite class."
"Well, I do so class them."
"That," said I, "is a stiffer proposition, my friend, and if you are going as far as that it is hard to know what to answer.
For if your position were that injustice is profitable yet you conceded it to be vicious and disgraceful as some other disputants do, there would be a chance for an argument on conventional principles.
But, as it is, you obviously are going to affirm that it is honorable and strong and you will attach to it all the other qualities that we were assigning to the just, since you don't shrink from putting it in the category of virtue and wisdom."
"You are a most veritable prophet," he replied.
"Well," said I, "I mustn't flinch from following out the logic of the inquiry, so long as I conceive you to be saying what you think.
For now, Thrasymachus, I absolutely believe that you are not 'mocking' us but telling us your real opinions about the truth."
"What difference does it make to you," he said, "whether I believe it or not? Why don't you test the argument?"
"No difference," said I,
"but here is something I want you to tell me in addition to what you have said.
Do you think the just man would want to overreach or exceed another just man?"
"By no means," he said;
"otherwise he would not be the delightful simpleton that he is."
"And would he exceed or overreach or go beyond the just action?"
"Not that either,"
he replied.
"But how would he treat the unjust man would he deem it proper and just to outdo, overreach, or go beyond him or would he not?"
"He would," he said, "but he wouldn't be able to."
"That is not my question," I said, "but whether it is not the fact that the just man does not claim and wish to outdo the just man but only the unjust?"
"That is the case," he replied.
"How about the unjust then?
Does he claim to overreach and outdo the just man and the just action?"
"Of course,"
he said,
"since he claims to overreach and get the better of everything."
"Then the unjust man will overreach and outdo also both the unjust man and the unjust action, and all his endeavor will be to get the most in everything for himself."
"That is so."
"Let us put it in this way," I said;
"the just man does not seek to take advantage of his like but of his unlike, but the unjust man of both."
"Admirably put," he said.
"But the unjust man is intelligent and good and the just man neither."
"That, too, is right," he said.
"Is it not also true," I said, "that the unjust man is like the intelligent and good and the just man is not?"
"Of course," he said, "being such he will be like to such and the other not."
"Excellent.
Then each is such as that to which he is like."
"What else do you suppose?"
he said.
"Very well, Thrasymachus, but do you recognize that one man is a musician and another unmusical?"
"I do."
"Which is the intelligent and which the unintelligent?"
"The musician, I presume, is the intelligent and the unmusical the unintelligent."
"And is he not good in the things in which he is intelligent and bad in the things in which he is unintelligent?"
"Yes."
"And the same of the physician?"
"The same."
"Do you think then, my friend, that any musician in the tuning of a lyre would want to overreach another musician in the tightening and relaxing of the strings or would claim and think fit to exceed or outdo him?"
"I do not."
"But would the the unmusical man?"
"Of necessity,"
he said.
"And how about the medical man?
In prescribing food and drink would he want to outdo the medical man or the medical procedure?"
"Surely not."
"But he would the unmedical man?"
"Yes."
"Consider then with regard to all forms of knowledge and ignorance whether you think that anyone who knows would choose to do or say other or more than what another who knows would do or say, and not rather exactly what his like would do in the same action."
"Why, perhaps it must be so," he said, "in such cases."
"But what of the ignorant man?
Would he not overreach or outdo equally the knower and the ignorant?"
"It may be."
"But the one who knows is wise?"
"I'll say so."
"And the wise is good?"
"I'll say so."
"Then he who is good and wise will not wish to overreach his like but his unlike and opposite."
"It seems so,"
he said.
"But the bad man and the ignoramus will overreach both like and unlike?"
"So it appears."
"And does not our unjust man, Thrasymachus, overreach both unlike and like?
Did you not say that?"
"I did,"
he replied.
"But the just man will not overreach his like but only his unlike?"
"Yes."
"Then the just man is like the wise and good, and the unjust is like the bad and the ignoramus."
"It seems likely."
"But furthermore we agreed that such is each as that to which he is like."
"Yes, we did."
"Then the just man has turned out on our hands to be good and wise and the unjust man bad and ignorant."
Thrasymachus made all these admissions not as I now lightly narrate them, but with much baulking and reluctance and prodigious sweating, it being summer,
and it was then I beheld what I had never seen before Thrasymachus blushing.
But when we did reach our conclusion that justice is virtue and wisdom and injustice vice and ignorance,
"Good," said I, "let this be taken as established.
But we were also affirming that injustice is a strong and potent thing.
Don't you remember, Thrasymachus?"
"I remember,"
he said;
"but I don't agree with what you are now saying either
and I have an answer to it,
but if I were to attempt to state it, I know very well that you would say that I was delivering a harangue.
Either then allow me to speak at such length as I desire, or, if you prefer to ask questions, go on questioning and I, as we do for old wives telling their tales, will say 'Very good' and will nod assent and dissent."
"No, no," said I, "not counter to your own belief."
"Yes, to please you," he said, "since you don't allow me freedom of speech.
And yet what more do you want?"
"Nothing, indeed," said I; "but if this is what you propose to do, do it
and I will ask the questions."
"Ask on, then."
"This, then, is the question I ask, the same as before, so that our inquiry may proceed in sequence.
What is the nature of injustice as compared with justice?
For the statement made, I believe, was that injustice is a more potent and stronger thing than justice.
But now," I said, "if justice is wisdom and virtue, it will easily, I take it, be shown to be also a stronger thing than injustice, since injustice is ignorance
no one could now fail to recognize that
but what I want is not quite so simple as that.
I wish, Thrasymachus, to consider it in some such fashion as this.
A city, you would say, may be unjust and try to enslave other cities unjustly, have them enslaved and hold many of them in subjection."
"Certainly,"
he said;
"and this is what the best state will chiefly do, the state whose injustice is most complete."
"I understand," I said, "that this was your view.
But the point that I am considering is this, whether the city that thus shows itself superior to another will have this power without justice or whether she must of necessity combine it with justice."
"If," he replied, "what you were just now saying holds good, that justice is wisdom, with justice; if it is as I said, with injustice."
"Admirable, Thrasymachus," I said; "you not only nod assent and dissent, but give excellent answers."
"I am trying to please you," he replied.
"Very kind of you.
But please me in one thing more and tell me this:
do you think that a city, an army, or bandits, or thieves, or any other group that attempted any action in common, could accomplish anything if they wronged one another?"
"Certainly not,"
said he.
"But if they didn't, wouldn't they be more likely to?"
"Assuredly."
"For factions, Thrasymachus, are the outcome of injustice, and hatreds and internecine conflicts, but justice brings oneness of mind and love. Is it not so?"
"So be it," he replied, "not to differ from you."
"That is good of you, my friend;
but tell me this:
if it is the business of injustice to engender hatred wherever it is found, will it not, when it springs up either among freemen or slaves, cause them to hate and be at strife with one another, and make them incapable of effective action in common?"
"By all means."
"Suppose, then, it springs up between two, will they not be at outs with and hate each other and be enemies both to one another and to the just?"
"They will,"
he said.
"And then will you tell me that if injustice arises in one it will lose its force and function or will it none the less keep it?"
"Have it that it keeps it,"
he said.
"And is it not apparent that its force is such that wherever it is found in city, family, camp, or in anything else it first renders the thing incapable of cooperation with itself owing to faction and difference, and secondly an enemy to itself and to its opposite in every case, the just? Isn't that so?"
"By all means."
"Then in the individual too, I presume, its presence will operate all these effects which it is its nature to produce.
It will in the first place make him incapable of accomplishing anything because of inner faction and lack of self-agreement, and then an enemy to himself and to the just. Is it not so?"
"Yes."
"But, my friend, the gods too are just."
"Have it that they are,"
he said.
"So to the gods also, it seems, the unjust man will be hateful, but the just man dear."
"Revel in your discourse," he said, "without fear,
for I shall not oppose you, so as not to offend your partisans here."
"Fill up the measure of my feast, then, and complete it for me," I said, "by continuing to answer as you have been doing.
Now that the just appear to be wiser and better and more capable of action and the unjust incapable of any common action, and that if we ever say that any men who are unjust have vigorously combined to put something over, our statement is not altogether true,
for they would not have kept their hands from one another if they had been thoroughly unjust,
but it is obvious that there was in them some justice which prevented them from wronging at the same time one another too as well as those whom they attacked;
and by dint of this they accomplished whatever they did and set out to do injustice only half corrupted by injustice, since utter rascals completely unjust are completely incapable of effective action
all this I understand to be the truth, and not what you originally laid down.
But whether it is also true that the just have a better life than the unjust and are happier, which is the question we afterwards proposed for examination, is what we now have to consider.
It appears even now that they are, I think, from what has already been said.
But all the same we must examine it more carefully.
For it is no ordinary matter that we are discussing, but the right conduct of life."
"Proceed with your inquiry,"
he said.
"I proceed,"
said I.
"Tell me then
would you say that a horse has a specific function?"
"I would."
"Would you be willing to define the work of a horse or of anything else to be that which one can do only with it or best with it?"
"I don't understand,"
he replied.
"Well, take it this way: is there anything else with which you can see except the eyes?"
"Certainly not."
"Again, could you hear with anything but ears?"
"By no means."
"Would you not rightly say that these are the functions of these?"
"By all means."
"Once more, you could use a dirk to trim vine branches and a knife and many other instruments."
"Certainly."
"But nothing so well, I take it, as a pruning-knife fashioned for this purpose."
"That is true."
"Must we not then assume this to be the work or function of that?"
"We must."
"You will now, then, I fancy, better apprehend the meaning of my question when I asked whether that is not the work of a thing which it only or it better than anything else can perform."
"Well," he said, "I do understand, and agree that the work of anything is that."
"Very good," said I.
"Do you not also think that there is a specific virtue or excellence of everything for which a specific function is appointed?
Let us return to the same examples.
The eyes we say have a function?"
"They have."
"Is there also a virtue of the eyes?"
"There is a virtue."
"And was there not a function of the ears?"
"Yes."
"And so also a virtue?"
"Also a virtue."
"And what of all other things? Is the case not the same?"
"The same."
"Take note now.
Could the eyes possibly fulfil their function well if they lacked their own proper excellence and had in its stead the defect?"
"How could they?"
he said;
"for I presume you meant blindness instead of vision."
"Whatever," said I, "the excellence may be.
For I have not yet come to that question, but am only asking whether whatever operates will not do its own work well by its own virtue and badly by its own defect."
"That much," he said, "you may affirm to be true."
"Then the ears, too, if deprived of their own virtue will do their work ill?"
"Assuredly."
"And do we then apply the same principle to all things?"
"I think so."
"Then next consider this.
The soul, has it a work which you couldn't accomplish with anything else in the world, as for example, management, rule, deliberation, and the like, is there anything else than soul to which you could rightly assign these and say that they were its peculiar work?"
"Nothing else."
"And again life?
Shall we say that too is the function of the soul?"
"Most certainly,"
he said.
"And do we not also say that there is an excellence virtue of the soul?"
"We do."
"Will the soul ever accomplish its own work well if deprived of its own virtue, or is this impossible?"
"It is impossible."
"Of necessity, then, a bad soul will govern and manage things badly while the good soul will in all these things do well."
"Of necessity."
"And did we not agree that the excellence or virtue of soul is justice and its defect injustice?"
"Yes, we did."
"The just soul and the just man then will live well and the unjust ill?"
"So it appears," he said, "by your reasoning."
"But furthermore, he who lives well is blessed and happy, and he who does not the contrary."
"Of course."
"Then the just is happy and the unjust miserable."
"So be it,"
he said.
"But it surely does not pay to be miserable, but to be happy."
"Of course not."
"Never, then, most worshipful Thrasymachus, can injustice be more profitable than justice."
"Let this complete your entertainment, Socrates, at the festival of Bendis."
"A feast furnished by you, Thrasymachus," I said, "now that you have become gentle with me and are no longer angry.
I have not dined well, however by my own fault, not yours.
But just as gluttons snatch at every dish that is handed along and taste it before they have properly enjoyed the preceding,
so I, methinks, before finding the first object of our inquiry what justice is let go of that and set out to consider something about it, namely whether it is vice and ignorance or wisdom and virtue;
and again, when later the view was sprung upon us that injustice is more profitable than justice I could not refrain from turning to that from the other topic.
So that for me the present outcome of the discussion is that I know nothing.
For if I don't know what the just is,
I shall hardly know whether it is a virtue or not, and whether its possessor is or is not happy."
When I had said this I supposed that I was done with the subject,
but it all turned out to be only a prelude.
For Glaucon, who is always an intrepid enterprising spirit in everything, would not on this occasion acquiesce in Thrasymachus's abandonment of his case,
but said,
"Socrates, is it your desire to seem to have persuaded us or really to persuade us that it is without exception better to be just than unjust?"
"Really," I said, "if the choice rested with me."
"Well, then, you are not doing what you wish.
For tell me:
do you agree that there is a kind of good which we would choose to possess, not from desire for its after effects, but welcoming it for its own sake?
As, for example, joy and such pleasures are harmless and nothing results from them afterwards save to have and to hold the enjoyment."
"I recognise that kind," said I.
"And again a kind that we love both for its own sake and for its consequences, such as understanding, sight, and health?
For these presume we welcome for both reasons."
"Yes,"
I said.
"And can you discern a third form of good under which falls exercise and being healed when sick and the art of healing and the making of money generally?
For of them we would say that they are laborious and painful yet beneficial, and for their own sake we would not accept them, but only for the rewards and other benefits that accrue from them."
"Why yes," I said, "I must admit this third class also.
But what of it?"
"In which of these classes do you place justice?" he said.
"In my opinion," I said, "it belongs in the fairest class, that which a man who is to be happy must love both for its own sake and for the results."
"Yet the multitude," he said, "do not think so, but that it belongs to the toilsome class of things that must be practiced for the sake of rewards and repute due to opinion but that in itself is to be shunned as an affliction."
"I am aware," said I, "that that is the general opinion and Thrasymachus has for some time been disparaging it as such and praising injustice.
But I, it seems, am somewhat slow to learn."
"Come now," he said, "hear what I too have to say and see if you agree with me.
For Thrasymachus seems to me to have given up to you too soon, as if he were a serpent that you had charmed,
but I am not yet satisfied with the proof that has been offered about justice and injustice.
For what I desire is to hear what each of them is and what potency and effect it has in and of itself dwelling in the soul, but to dismiss their rewards and consequences.
This, then, is what I propose to do, with your concurrence.
I will renew the argument of Thrasymachus and will first state what men say is the nature and origin of justice;
secondly, that all who practise it do so reluctantly, regarding it as something necessary and not as a good;
and thirdly, that they have plausible grounds for thus acting,
since forsooth the life of the unjust man is far better than that of the just man as they say;
though I, Socrates, don't believe it.
Yet I am disconcerted when my ears are dinned by the arguments of Thrasymachus and innumerable others.
But the case for justice, to prove that it is better than injustice, I have never yet heard stated by any as I desire to hear it.
What I desire is to hear an encomium on justice in and by itself.
And I think I am most likely to get that from you.
For which reason I will lay myself out in praise of the life of injustice, and in so speaking will give you an example of the manner in which I desire to hear from you in turn the dispraise of injustice and the praise of justice.
Consider whether my proposal pleases you."
"Nothing could please me more," said I;
"for on what subject would a man of sense rather delight to hold and hear discourse again and again?"
"That is excellent," he said;
"and now listen to what I said would be the first topic the nature and origin of justice.
By nature, they say, to commit injustice is a good and to suffer it is an evil, but that the excess of evil in being wronged is greater than the excess of good in doing wrong.
So that when men do wrong and are wronged by one another and taste of both,
those who lack the power to avoid the one and take the other determine that it is for their profit to make a compact with one another neither to commit nor to suffer injustice;
and that this is the beginning of legislation and covenants between men, and that they name the commandment of the law the lawful and the just, and that this is the genesis and essential nature of justice
a compromise between the best, which is to do wrong with impunity, and the worst, which is to be wronged and be impotent to get one's revenge.
Justice, they tell us, being mid-way between the two, is accepted and approved, not as a real good, but as a thing honored in the lack of vigor to do injustice,
since anyone who had the power to do it and was in reality 'a man' would never make a compact with anybody either to wrong nor to be wronged; for he would be mad.
The nature, then, of justice is this and such as this, Socrates, and such are the conditions in which it originates, according to the theory.
"But as for the second point, that those who practise it do so unwillingly and from want of power to commit injustice
we shall be most likely to apprehend that if we entertain some such supposition as this in thought:
if we grant to each, the just and the unjust, license and power to do whatever he pleases, and then accompany them in imagination and see whither his desire will conduct each.
We should then catch the just man in the very act of resorting to the same conduct as the unjust man because of the self-advantage which every creature by its nature pursues as a good,
while by the convention of law it is forcibly diverted to paying honor to 'equality.'
The licence that I mean would be most nearly such as would result from supposing them to have the power which men say once came to the ancestor of Gyges the Lydian.
They relate that he was a shepherd in the service of the ruler at that time of Lydia,
and that after a great deluge of rain and an earthquake the ground opened and a chasm appeared in the place where he was pasturing;
and they say that he saw and wondered and went down into the chasm;
and the story goes that he beheld other marvels there and a hollow bronze horse with little doors,
and that he peeped in and saw a corpse within, as it seemed, of more than mortal stature,
and that there was nothing else but a gold ring on its hand, which he took off and went forth.
And when the shepherds held their customary assembly to make their monthly report to the king about the flocks, he also attended wearing the ring.
So as he sat there it chanced that he turned the collet of the ring towards himself, towards the inner part of his hand,
and when this took place they say that he became invisible to those who sat by him
and they spoke of him as absent
and that he was amazed, and again fumbling with the ring turned the collet outwards and so became visible.
On noting this he experimented with the ring to see if it possessed this virtue,
and he found the result to be that when he turned the collet inwards he became invisible, and when outwards visible;
and becoming aware of this, he immediately managed things so that he became one of the messengers who went up to the king,
and on coming there he seduced the king's wife and with her aid set upon the king and slew him and possessed his kingdom.
If now there should be two such rings, and the just man should put on one and the unjust the other,
no one could be found, it would seem, of such adamantine temper as to persevere in justice and endure to refrain his hands from the possessions of others and not touch them, though he might with impunity take what he wished even from the marketplace, and enter into houses and lie with whom he pleased, and slay and loose from bonds whomsoever he would, and in all other things conduct himself among mankind as the equal of a god.
And in so acting he would do no differently from the other man, but both would pursue the same course.
And yet this is a great proof, one might argue, that no one is just of his own will but only from constraint, in the belief that justice is not his personal good, inasmuch as every man, when he supposes himself to have the power to do wrong, does wrong.
For that there is far more profit for him personally in injustice than in justice is what every man believes, and believes truly, as the proponent of this theory will maintain.
For if anyone who had got such a license within his grasp should refuse to do any wrong or lay his hands on others' possessions, he would be regarded as most pitiable and a great fool by all who took note of it, though they would praise him before one another's faces, deceiving one another because of their fear of suffering injustice.
So much for this point.
"But to come now to the decision between our two kinds of life, if we separate the most completely just and the most completely unjust man, we shall be able to decide rightly, but if not, not.
How, then, is this separation to be made?
Thus: we must subtract nothing of his injustice from the unjust man or of his justice from the just, but assume the perfection of each in his own mode of conduct.
In the first place, the unjust man must act as clever craftsmen do:
a first-rate pilot or physician, for example, feels the difference between impossibilities and possibilities in his art and attempts the one and lets the others go;
and then, too, if he does happen to trip, he is equal to correcting his error.
Similarly, the unjust man who attempts injustice rightly must be supposed to escape detection if he is to be altogether unjust,
and we must regard the man who is caught as a bungler.
For the height of injustice is to seem just without being so.
To the perfectly unjust man, then, we must assign perfect injustice and withhold nothing of it, but we must allow him, while committing the greatest wrongs, to have secured for himself the greatest reputation for justice;
and if he does happen to trip, we must concede to him the power to correct his mistakes by his ability to speak persuasively if any of his misdeeds come to light,
and when force is needed, to employ force by reason of his manly spirit and vigor and his provision of friends and money;
and when we have set up an unjust man of this character, our theory must set the just man at his side a simple and noble man, who, in the phrase of Aeschylus, does not wish to seem but be good.
Then we must deprive him of the seeming.
For if he is going to be thought just he will have honors and gifts because of that esteem.
We cannot be sure in that case whether he is just for justice' sake or for the sake of the gifts and the honors.
So we must strip him bare of everything but justice and make his state the opposite of his imagined counterpart.
Though doing no wrong he must have the repute of the greatest injustice, so that he may be put to the test as regards justice through not softening because of ill repute and the consequences thereof.
But let him hold on his course unchangeable even unto death, seeming all his life to be unjust though being just, that so, both men attaining to the limit, the one of injustice, the other of justice, we may pass judgement which of the two is the happier."
"Bless me, my dear Glaucon," said I, "how strenuously you polish off each of your two men for the competition for the prize as if it were a statue."
"To the best of my ability," he replied,
"and if such is the nature of the two, it becomes an easy matter, I fancy, to unfold the tale of the sort of life that awaits each.
We must tell it, then;
and even if my language is somewhat rude and brutal, you must not suppose, Socrates, that it is I who speak thus, but those who commend injustice above justice.
What they will say is this: that such being his disposition the just man will have to endure the lash, the rack, chains, the branding-iron in his eyes, and finally, after every extremity of suffering, he will be crucified, and so will learn his lesson that not to be but to seem just is what we ought to desire.
And the saying of Aeschylus was, it seems, far more correctly applicable to the unjust man.
For it is literally true, they will say, that the unjust man, as pursuing what clings closely to reality, to truth, and not regulating his life by opinion, desires not to seem but to be unjust, "exploiting the deep furrows of his wit, from which there grows the fruit of counsels shrewd."
first office and rule in the state because of his reputation for justice, then a wife from any family he chooses, and the giving of his children in marriage to whomsoever he pleases, dealings and partnerships with whom he will, and in all these transactions advantage and profit for himself because he has no squeamishness about committing injustice;
and so they say that if he enters into lawsuits, public or private, he wins and gets the better of his opponents, and, getting the better, is rich and benefits his friends and harms his enemies;
and he performs sacrifices and dedicates votive offerings to the gods adequately and magnificently, and he serves and pays court to men whom he favors and to the gods far better than the just man, so that he may reasonably expect the favor of heaven also to fall rather to him than to the just.
So much better they say, Socrates, is the life that is prepared for the unjust man from gods and men than that which awaits the just."
When Glaucon had thus spoken, I had a mind to make some reply thereto,
but his brother Adeimantus said, "You surely don't suppose, Socrates, that the statement of the case is complete?"
"Why, what else?"
I said.
"The very most essential point," said he, "has not been mentioned."
"Then," said I, "as the proverb has it, 'Let a brother help a man'
and so, if he omits any word or deed, do you come to his aid.
Though for my part what he has already said is quite enough to overthrow me and incapacitate me for coming to the rescue of justice."
"Nonsense," he said, "but listen to this further point.
We must set forth the reasoning and the language of the opposite party, of those who commend justice and dispraise injustice, if what I conceive to be Glaucon's meaning is to be made more clear.
Fathers, when they address exhortations to their sons, and all those who have others in their charge, urge the necessity of being just, not by praising justice itself, but the good repute with mankind that accrues from it, the object that they hold before us being that by seeming to be just the man may get from the reputation office and alliances and all the good things that Glaucon just now enumerated as coming to the unjust man from his good name.
But those people draw out still further this topic of reputation.
For, throwing in good standing with the gods, they have no lack of blessings to describe, which they affirm the gods give to pious men,
even as the worthy Hesiod and Homer declare,
the one that the gods make the oaks bear for the just: "'Acorns on topmost branches and swarms of bees on their mid-trunks,' and he tells how the 'Flocks of the fleece-bearing sheep are laden and weighted with soft wool,' and of many other blessings akin to these;
and similarly the other poet: "Even as when a good king, who rules in the fear of the high gods, upholds justice and right, and the black earth yields him her rich harvest, barley and wheat, and his trees are laden and weighted with fair fruits, increase comes to his flocks and the ocean is teeming with fishes."
And Musaeus and his son have a more excellent song than these of the blessings that the gods bestow on the righteous.
For they conduct them to the house of Hades in their tale and arrange a symposium of the saints, where, reclined on couches crowned with wreaths, they entertain the time henceforth with wine, as if the fairest meed of virtue were an everlasting drunk.
And others extend still further the rewards of virtue from the gods.
For they say that the children's children of the pious and oath-keeping man and his race thereafter never fail.
Such and such-like are their praises of justice.
But the impious and the unjust they bury in mud in the house of Hades and compel them to fetch water in a sieve, and, while they still live, they bring them into evil repute, and all the sufferings that Glaucon enumerated as befalling just men who are thought to be unjust, these they recite about the unjust, but they have nothing else to say.
Such is the praise and the censure of each.
"Consider further, Socrates, another kind of language about justice and injustice employed by both laymen and poets.
All with one accord reiterate that soberness and righteousness are fair and honorable, to be sure, but unpleasant and laborious,
while licentiousness and injustice are pleasant and easy to win and are only in opinion and by convention disgraceful.
They say that injustice pays better than justice, for the most part,
and they do not scruple to felicitate bad men who are rich or have other kinds of power to do them honor in public and private, and to dishonor and disregard those who are in any way weak or poor, even while admitting that they are better men than the others.
But the strangest of all these speeches are the things they say about the gods and virtue, how so it is that the gods themselves assign to many good men misfortunes and an evil life but to their opposites a contrary lot;
and begging priests and soothsayers go to rich men's doors and make them believe that they by means of sacrifices and incantations have accumulated a treasure of power from the gods that can expiate and cure with pleasurable festivals any misdeed of a man or his ancestors, and that if a man wishes to harm an enemy, at slight cost he will be enabled to injure just and unjust alike, since they are masters of spells and enchantments that constrain the gods to serve their end.
And for all these sayings they cite the poets as witnesses, with regard to the ease and plentifulness of vice, quoting:
"Evil-doing in plenty a man shall find for the seeking; smooth is the way and it lies near at hand and is easy to enter; but on the pathway of virtue the gods put sweat from the first step," and a certain long and uphill road.
And others cite Homer as a witness to the beguiling of gods by men, since he too said:
"The gods themselves are moved by prayers, and men by sacrifice and soothing vows, and incense and libation turn their will, praying, whenever they have sinned and made transgression."
And they produce a bushel of books of Musaeus and Orpheus, the offspring of the Moon and of the Muses, as they affirm,
and these books they use in their ritual, and make not only ordinary men but states believe that there really are remissions of sins and purifications for deeds of injustice, by means of sacrifice and pleasant sport for the living, and that there are also special rites for the defunct, which they call functions, that deliver us from evils in that other world, while terrible things await those who have neglected to sacrifice.
"What, Socrates, do we suppose is the effect of all such sayings about the esteem in which men and gods hold virtue and vice upon the souls that hear them, the souls of young men who are quick-witted and capable of flitting, as it were, from one expression of opinion to another and inferring from them all the character and the path whereby a man would lead the best life?
Such a youth would most likely put to himself the question Pindar asks,
"'Is it by justice or by crooked deceit that I the higher tower shall scale and so live my life out in fenced and guarded security?'"
The consequences of my being just are, unless I likewise seem so, not assets, they say, but liabilities, labor and total loss;
but if I am unjust and have procured myself a reputation for justice a godlike life is promised.
Then since it is the "'seeming'" as the wise men show me, that "'masters the reality'" and is lord of happiness, to this I must devote myself without reserve.
For a front and a show I must draw about myself a shadow-line of virtue, but trail behind me the fox of most sage Archilochus, shifty and bent on gain.
Nay, 'tis objected, it is not easy for a wrong-doer always to lie hid.
Neither is any other big thing facile, we shall reply.
But all the same if we expect to be happy, we must pursue the path to which the footprints of our arguments point.
For with a view to lying hid we will organize societies and political clubs, and there are teachers of cajolery who impart the arts of the popular assembly and the court-room.
So that, partly by persuasion, partly by force, we shall contrive to overreach with impunity.
But against the gods, it may be said, neither secrecy nor force can avail.
Well, if there are no gods, or they do not concern themselves with the doings of men, neither need we concern ourselves with eluding their observation.
If they do exist and pay heed, we know and hear of them only from such discourses and from the poets who have described their pedigrees.
But these same authorities tell us that the gods are capable of being persuaded and swerved from their course by 'sacrifice and soothing vows' and dedications.
We must believe them in both or neither.
And if we are to believe them, the thing to do is to commit injustice and offer sacrifice from fruits of our wrongdoing.
For if we are just, we shall, it is true, be unscathed by the gods, but we shall be putting away from us the profits of injustice; but if we are unjust, we shall win those profits, and, by the importunity of our prayers, when we transgress and sin, we shall persuade them and escape scot-free.
Yes, it will be objected, but we shall be brought to judgement in the world below for our unjust deeds here, we or our children's children.
'Nay, my dear sir,' our calculating friend will say, 'here again the rites for the dead have much efficacy, and the absolving divinities, as the greatest cities declare, and the sons of gods, who became the poets and prophets of the gods, and who reveal that this is the truth.
"On what further ground, then, could we prefer justice to supreme injustice?
If we combine this with a counterfeit decorum, we shall prosper to our heart's desire, with gods and men in life and death, as the words of the multitude and of men of the highest authority declare.
In consequence, then, of all that has been said, what possibility is there, Socrates, that any man who has the power of any resources of mind, money, body, or family should consent to honor justice and not rather laugh when he hears her praised?
In sooth, if anyone is able to show the falsity of these arguments, and has come to know with sufficient assurance that justice is best,
he feels much indulgence for the unjust, and is not angry with them, but is aware that except a man by inborn divinity of his nature disdains injustice, or, having won to knowledge, refrains from it, no one else is willingly just, but that it is from lack of manly spirit or from old age or some other weakness that men dispraise injustice, lacking the power to practise it.
The fact is patent.
For no sooner does such one come into the power than he works injustice to the extent of his ability.
And the sole cause of all this is the fact that was the starting-point of this entire plea of my friend here and of myself to you, Socrates, pointing out how strange it is that of all you self-styled advocates of justice, from the heroes of old whose discourses survive to the men of the present day, not one has ever censured injustice or commended justice otherwise than in respect of the repute, the honors, and the gifts that accrue from each.
But what each one of them is in itself, by its own inherent force, when it is within the soul of the possessor and escapes the eyes of both gods and men, no one has ever adequately set forth in poetry or prose the proof that the one is the greatest of all evils that the soul contains within itself, while justice is the greatest good.
For if you had all spoken in this way from the beginning and from our youth up had sought to convince us, we should not now be guarding against one another's injustice,
but each would be his own best guardian, for fear lest by working injustice he should dwell in communion with the greatest of evils.
This, Socrates, and perhaps even more than this, Thrasymachus and haply another might say in pleas for and against justice and injustice, inverting their true potencies, as I believe, grossly.
But I for I have no reason to hide anything from you am laying myself out to the utmost on the theory, because I wish to hear its refutation from you.
Do not merely show us by argument that justice is superior to injustice, but make clear to us what each in and of itself does to its possessor, whereby the one is evil and the other good.
But do away with the repute of both, as Glaucon urged.
For, unless you take away from either the true repute and attach to each the false, we shall say that it is not justice that you are praising but the semblance, nor injustice that you censure, but the seeming, and that you really are exhorting us to be unjust but conceal it, and that you are at one with Thrasymachus in the opinion that justice is other man's good, the advantage of the other, and that injustice is advantageous and profitible to oneself but disadvantageous to the inferior.
Since, then, you have admitted that justice belongs to the class of those highest goods which are desirable both for their consequences and still more for their own sake, as sight, hearing, intelligence, yes and health too, and all other goods that are productive by their very nature and not by opinion,
this is what I would have you praise about justice the benefit which it and the harm which injustice inherently works upon its possessor, but the rewards and the honors that depend on opinion, leave to others to praise.
For while I would listen to others who thus commended justice and disparaged injustice, bestowing their praise and their blame on the reputation and the rewards of either,
I could not accept that sort of thing from you unless you say I must, because you have passed your entire life in the consideration of this very matter.
Do not then, I repeat, merely prove to us in argument the superiority of justice to injustice,
but show us what it is that each inherently does to its possessor whether he does or does not escape the eyes of gods and men whereby the one is good and the other evil."
While I had always admired the natural parts of Glaucon and Adeimantus, I was especially pleased by their words on this occasion, and said:
"It was excellently spoken of you, sons of the man we know, in the beginning of the elegy which the admirer of Glaucon wrote when you distinguished yourselves in the battle of Megara 'Sons of Ariston, whose race from a glorious sire is god-like.'
This, my friends, I think, was well said.
For there must indeed be a touch of the god-like in your disposition if you are not convinced that injustice is preferable to justice though you can plead its case in such fashion.
And I believe that you are really not convinced.
I infer this from your general character since from your words alone I should have distrusted you.
But the more I trust you the more I am at a loss what to make of the matter.
I do not know how I can come to the rescue.
For I doubt my ability by reason that you have not accepted the arguments whereby I thought I proved against Thrasymachus that justice is better than injustice.
Nor yet again do I know how I can refuse to come to the rescue.
For I fear lest it be actually impious to stand idly by when justice is reviled and be faint-hearted and not defend her so long as one has breath and can utter his voice.
The best thing, then, is to aid her as best I can."
Glaucon, then, and the rest besought me by all means to come to the rescue and not to drop the argument but to pursue to the end the investigation as to the nature of each and the truth about their respective advantages.
I said then as I thought: "The inquiry we are undertaking is no easy one but calls for keen vision, as it seems to me.
So, since we are not clever persons,
I think we should employ the method of search that we should use if we, with not very keen vision, were bidden to read small letters from a distance, and then someone had observed that these same letters exist elsewhere larger and on a larger surface. We should have accounted it a godsend, I fancy, to be allowed to read those letters first, and examine the smaller, if they are the same."
"Quite so,"
said Adeimantus;
"but what analogy to do you detect in the inquiry about justice?"
"I will tell you," I said:
"there is a justice of one man, we say, and, I suppose, also of an entire city."
"Assuredly,"
said he.
"Is not the city larger than the man?"
"It is larger,"
he said.
"Then, perhaps, there would be more justice in the larger object and more easy to apprehend.
If it please you, then, let us first look for its quality in states, and then only examine it also in the individual, looking for the likeness of the greater in the form of the less."
"I think that is a good suggestion," he said.
"If, then," said I, "our argument should observe the origin of a state, we should see also the origin of justice and injustice in it."
"It may be,"
said he.
"And if this is done, we may expect to find more easily what we are seeking?"
"Much more."
"Shall we try it, then, and go through with it?
I fancy it is no slight task.
Reflect, then."
"We have reflected," said Adeimantus;
"proceed and don't refuse."
"The origin of the city, then," said I, "in my opinion, is to be found in the fact that we do not severally suffice for our own needs, but each of us lacks many things.
Do you think any other principle establishes the state?"
"No other,"
said he.
"As a result of this, then, one man calling in another for one service and another for another, we, being in need of many things, gather many into one place of abode as associates and helpers, and to this dwelling together we give the name city or state, do we not?"
"By all means."
"And between one man and another there is an interchange of giving, if it so happens, and taking, because each supposes this to be better for himself."
"Certainly."
"Come, then, let us create a city from the beginning, in our theory.
Its real creator, as it appears, will be our needs."
"Obviously."
"Now the first and chief of our needs is the provision of food for existence and life."
"Assuredly."
"The second is housing and the third is raiment and that sort of thing."
"That is so."
"Tell me, then," said I, "how our city will suffice for the provision of all these things.
Will there not be a farmer for one, and a builder, and then again a weaver?
And shall we add thereto a cobbler and some other purveyor for the needs of body?"
"Certainly."
"The indispensable minimum of a city, then, would consist of four or five men."
"Apparently."
"What of this, then?
Shall each of these contribute his work for the common use of all?
I mean shall the farmer, who is one, provide food for four and spend fourfold time and toil on the production of food and share it with the others, or shall he take no thought for them and provide a fourth portion of the food for himself alone in a quarter of the time and employ the other three-quarters, the one in the provision of a house, the other of a garment, the other of shoes, and not have the bother of associating with other people, but, himself for himself, mind his own affairs?"
And Adeimantus said,
"But, perhaps, Socrates, the former way is easier."
"It would not, by Zeus, be at all strange," said I;
"for now that you have mentioned it, it occurs to me myself that, to begin with, our several natures are not all alike but different. One man is naturally fitted for one task, and another for another.
Don't you think so?"
"I do."
"Again, would one man do better working at many tasks or one at one?"
"One at one," he said.
"And, furthermore, this, I fancy, is obvious that if one lets slip the right season, the favorable moment in any task, the work is spoiled."
"Obvious."
"That, I take it, is because the business will not wait upon the leisure of the workman, but the workman must attend to it as his main affair, and not as a by-work."
"He must indeed."
"The result, then, is that more things are produced, and better and more easily when one man performs one task according to his nature, at the right moment, and at leisure from other occupations."
"By all means."
"Then, Adeimantus, we need more than four citizens for the provision of the things we have mentioned.
For the farmer, it appears, will not make his own plough if it is to be a good one, nor his hoe, nor his other agricultural implements, nor will the builder, who also needs many; and similarly the weaver and cobbler."
"True."
"Carpenters, then, and smiths and many similar craftsmen, associating themselves with our hamlet, will enlarge it considerably."
"Certainly."
"Yet it still wouldn't be very large even if we should add to them neat-herds and shepherds and other herders, so that the farmers might have cattle for ploughing, and the builders oxen to use with the farmers for transportation, and the weavers and cobblers hides and fleeces for their use."
"It wouldn't be a small city, either, if it had all these."
"But further," said I, "it is practically impossible to establish the city in a region where it will not need imports."
"It is impossible."
"There will be a further need, then, of those who will bring in from some other city what it requires."
"There will."
"And again, if our servitor goes forth empty-handed, not taking with him any of the things needed by those from whom they procure what they themselves require, he will come back with empty hands, will he not?"
"I think so."
"Then their home production must not merely suffice for themselves but in quality and quantity meet the needs of those of whom they have need."
"It must."
"So our city will require more farmers and other craftsmen."
"Yes, more."
"And also of other ministrants who are to export and import the merchandise.
These are traders, are they not?
"Yes."
"We shall also need traders, then."
"Assuredly."
"And if the trading is carried on by sea, we shall need quite a number of others who are expert in maritime business."
"Quite a number."
"But again, within the city itself how will they share with one another the products of their labor?
This was the very purpose of our association and establishment of a state."
"Obviously," he said, "by buying and selling."
"A market-place, then, and money as a token for the purpose of exchange will be the result of this."
"By all means."
"If, then, the farmer or any other craftsman taking his products to the market-place does not arrive at the same time with those who desire to exchange with him, is he to sit idle in the market-place and lose time from his own work?"
"By no means," he said, "but there are men who see this need and appoint themselves for this service in well-conducted cities they are generally those who are weakest in body and those who are useless for any other task.
They must wait there in the agora and exchange money for goods with those who wish to sell, and goods for money with as many as desire to buy."
"This need, then," said I, "creates the class of shopkeepers in our city.
Or is not shopkeepers the name we give to those who, planted in the agora, serve us in buying and selling, while we call those who roam from city to city merchants?"
"Certainly."
"And there are, furthermore, I believe, other servitors who in the things of the mind are not altogether worthy of our fellowship, but whose strength of body is sufficient for toil;
so they, selling the use of this strength and calling the price wages, are designated, I believe, wage-earners, are they not?"
"Certainly."
"Wage-earners, then, it seems, are the complement that helps to fill up the state."
"I think so."
"Has our city, then, Adeimantus, reached its full growth and is it complete?"
"Perhaps."
"Where, then, can justice and injustice be found in it?
And along with which of the constituents that we have considered does it come into the state?"
"I cannot conceive, Socrates," he said, "unless it be in some need that those very constituents have of one another."
"Perhaps that is a good suggestion," said I; "we must examine it and not hold back.
First of all, then, let us consider what will be the manner of life of men thus provided.
Will they not make bread and wine and garments and shoes?
And they will build themselves houses and carry on their work in summer for the most part unclad and unshod and in winter clothed and shod sufficiently?
And for their nourishment they will provide meal from their barley and flour from their wheat, and kneading and cooking these they will serve noble cakes and loaves on some arrangement of reeds or clean leaves, and, reclined on rustic beds strewn with bryony and myrtle, they will feast with their children, drinking of their wine thereto, garlanded and singing hymns to the gods in pleasant fellowship, not begetting offspring beyond their means lest they fall into poverty or war?"
Here Glaucon broke in: "No relishes apparently," he said, "for the men you describe as feasting."
"True" said I;
"I forgot that they will also have relishes salt, of course, and olives and cheese and onions and greens, the sort of things they boil in the country, they will boil up together.
But for dessert we will serve them figs and chickpeas and beans, and they will toast myrtle-berries and acorns before the fire, washing them down with moderate potations and so, living in peace and health, they will probably die in old age and hand on a like life to their offspring."
And he said, "If you were founding a city of pigs, Socrates, what other fodder than this would you provide?"
"Why, what would you have, Glaucon?" said I.
"What is customary," he replied;
"They must recline on couches, I presume, if they are not to be uncomfortable, and dine from tables and have made dishes and sweetmeats such as are now in use."
"Good," said I, "I understand.
It is not merely the origin of a city, it seems, that we are considering but the origin of a luxurious city.
Perhaps that isn't such a bad suggestion, either.
For by observation of such a city it may be we could discern the origin of justice and injustice in states.
The true state I believe to be the one we have described the healthy state, as it were.
But if it is your pleasure that we contemplate also a fevered state, there is nothing to hinder.
For there are some, it appears, who will not be contented with this sort of fare or with this way of life; but couches will have to be added thereto and tables and other furniture, yes, and relishes and myrrh and incense and girls and cakes all sorts of all of them.
And the requirements we first mentioned, houses and garments and shoes, will no longer be confined to necessities, but we must set painting to work and embroidery, and procure gold and ivory and similar adornments, must we not?"
"Yes,"
he said.
"Then we shall have to enlarge the city again.
For that healthy state is no longer sufficient,
but we must proceed to swell out its bulk and fill it up with a multitude of things that exceed the requirements of necessity in states, as, for example, the entire class of huntsmen, and the imitators, many of them occupied with figures and colors and many with music the poets and their assistants, rhapsodists, actors, chorus-dancers, contractors and the manufacturers of all kinds of articles, especially those that have to do with women's adornment.
And so we shall also want more servitors.
Don't you think that we shall need tutors, nurses wet and dry, beauty-shop ladies, barbers and yet again cooks and chefs?
And we shall have need, further, of swineherds;
there were none of these creatures in our former city, for we had no need of them, but in this city there will be this further need;
and we shall also require other cattle in great numbers if they are to be eaten, shall we not?"
"Yes."
"Doctors, too, are something whose services we shall be much more likely to require if we live thus than as before?"
"Much."
"And the territory, I presume, that was then sufficient to feed the then population, from being adequate will become too small. Is that so?"
"It is."
"Then we shall have to cut out a cantle of our neighbor's land if we are to have enough for pasture and ploughing, and they in turn of ours if they too abandon themselves to the unlimited acquisition of wealth, disregarding the limit set by our necessary wants."
"Inevitably, Socrates."
"We shall go to war as the next step, Glaucon or what will happen?"
"What you say,"
he said.
"And we are not yet to speak," said I, "of any evil or good effect of war, but only to affirm that we have further discovered the origin of war, namely, from those things from which the greatest disasters, public and private, come to states when they come."
"Certainly."
"Then, my friend, we must still further enlarge our city by no small increment, but by a whole army, that will march forth and fight it out with assailants in defence of all our wealth and the luxuries we have just described."
"How so?"
he said;
"are the citizens themselves not sufficient for it?"
"Not if you," said I, "and we all were right in the admission we made when we were molding our city.
We surely agreed, if you remember, that it is impossible for one man to do the work of many arts well."
"True,"
he said.
"Well, then,"
said I,
"don't you think that the business of fighting is an art and a profession?"
"It is indeed,"
he said.
"Should our concern be greater, then, for the cobbler's art than for the art of war?"
"By no means."
"Can we suppose, then, that while we were at pains to prevent the cobbler from attempting to be at the same time a farmer, a weaver, or a builder instead of just a cobbler, to the end that we might have the cobbler's business well done, and similarly assigned to each and every one man one occupation, for which he was fit and naturally adapted and at which he was to work all his days, at leisure from other pursuits and not letting slip the right moments for doing the work well, and that yet we are in doubt whether the right accomplishment of the business of war is not of supreme moment?
Is it so easy that a man who is cultivating the soil will be at the same time a soldier and one who is practising cobbling or any other trade, though no man in the world could make himself a competent expert at draughts or the dice who did not practise that and nothing else from childhood but treated it as an occasional business?
And are we to believe that a man who takes in hand a shield or any other instrument of war springs up on that very day a competent combatant in heavy armor or in any other form of warfare though no other tool will make a man be an artist or an athlete by his taking it in hand, nor will it be of any service to those who have neither acquired the science of it nor sufficiently practised themselves in its use?"
"Great indeed," he said, "would be the value of tools in that case."
"Then," said I, "in the same degree that the task of our guardians is the greatest of all, it would require more leisure than any other business and the greatest science and training."
"I think so,"
said he.
"Does it not also require a nature adapted to that very pursuit?"
"Of course."
"It becomes our task, then, it seems, if we are able, to select which and what kind of natures are suited for the guardianship of a state."
"Yes, ours."
"By Zeus," said I, "it is no light task that we have taken upon ourselves.
But we must not faint so far as our strength allows."
"No, we mustn't."
"Do you think," said I, "that there is any difference between the nature of a well-bred hound for this watch-dog's work and of a well-born lad?"
"What point have you in mind?"
"I mean that each of them must be keen of perception, quick in pursuit of what it has apprehended, and strong too if it has to fight it out with its captive."
"Why, yes," said he, "there is need of all these qualities."
"And it must, further, be brave if it is to fight well."
"Of course."
"And will a creature be ready to be brave that is not high-spirited, whether horse or dog or anything else?
Have you never observed what an irresistible and invincible thing is spirit, the presence of which makes every soul in the face of everything fearless and unconquerable?"
"I have."
"The physical qualities of the guardian, then, are obvious."
"Yes."
"And also those of his soul, namely that he must be of high spirit."
"Yes, this too."
"How then, Glaucon," said I, "will they escape being savage to one another and to the other citizens if this is to be their nature?"
"Not easily, by Zeus," said he.
"And yet we must have them gentle to their friends and harsh to their enemies; otherwise they will not await their destruction at the hands of others, but will be first themselves in bringing it about."
"True,"
he said.
"What, then, are we to do?" said I.
"Where shall we discover a disposition that is at once gentle and great-spirited?
For there appears to be an opposition between the spirited type and the gentle nature."
"There does."
"But yet if one lacks either of these qualities, a good guardian he never can be.
But these requirements resemble impossibilities, and so the result is that a good guardian is impossible."
"It seems likely,"
he said.
And I was at a standstill, and after reconsidering what we had been saying, I said, "We deserve to be at a loss, my friend, for we have lost sight of the comparison that we set before ourselves."
"What do you mean?"
"We failed to note that there are after all such natures as we thought impossible, endowed with these opposite qualities."
"Where?"
"It may be observed in other animals, but especially in that which we likened to the guardian.
You surely have observed in well-bred hounds that their natural disposition is to be most gentle to their familiars and those whom they recognize, but the contrary to those whom they do not know."
"I am aware of that."
"The thing is possible, then," said I, "and it is not an unnatural requirement that we are looking for in our guardian."
"It seems not."
"And does it seem to you that our guardian-to-be will also need, in addition to the being high-spirited, the further quality of having the love of wisdom in his nature?"
"How so?"
he said;
"I don't apprehend your meaning."
"This too," said I, "is something that you will discover in dogs and which is worth our wonder in the creature."
"What?"
"That the sight of an unknown person angers him before he has suffered any injury, but an acquaintance he will fawn upon though he has never received any kindness from him.
Have you never marvelled at that?"
"I never paid any attention to the matter before now, but that he acts in some such way is obvious."
"But surely that is an exquisite trait of his nature and one that shows a true love of wisdom."
"In what respect, pray?"
"In respect," said I, "that he distinguishes a friendly from a hostile aspect by nothing save his apprehension of the one and his failure to recognize the other.
How, I ask you, can the love of learning be denied to a creature whose criterion of the friendly and the alien is intelligence and ignorance?"
"It certainly cannot," he said.
"But you will admit," said I, "that the love of learning and the love of wisdom are the same?"
"The same,"
he said.
"Then may we not confidently lay it down in the case of man too, that if he is to be in some sort gentle to friends and familiars he must be by nature a lover of wisdom and of learning?"
"Let us so assume,"
he replied.
"The love of wisdom, then, and high spirit and quickness and strength will be combined for us in the nature of him who is to be a good and true guardian of the state."
"By all means,"
he said.
"Such, then," I said, "would be the basis of his character.
But the rearing of these men and their education, how shall we manage that?
And will the consideration of this topic advance us in any way towards discerning what is the object of our entire inquiry the origin of justice and injustice in a state our aim must be to omit nothing of a sufficient discussion, and yet not to draw it out to tiresome length?"
And Glaucon's brother replied, "Certainly, I expect that this inquiry will bring us nearer to that end."
"Certainly, then, my dear Adeimantus," said I, "we must not abandon it even if it prove to be rather long."
"No, we must not."
"Come, then, just as if we were telling stories or fables and had ample leisure, let us educate these men in our discourse."
"So we must."
"What, then, is our education?
Or is it hard to find a better than that which long time has discovered?
Which is, I suppose, gymnastics for the body and for the soul music."
"It is."
"And shall we not begin education in music earlier than in gymnastics?"
"Of course."
"And under music you include tales, do you not?"
"I do."
"And tales are of two species, the one true and the other false?"
"Yes."
"And education must make use of both, but first of the false?"
"I don't understand your meaning."
"Don't you understand," I said, "that we begin by telling children fables,
and the fable is, taken as a whole, false, but there is truth in it also?
And we make use of fable with children before gymnastics."
"That is so."
"That, then, is what I meant by saying that we must take up music before gymnastics."
"You were right,"
he said.
"Do you not know, then, that the beginning in every task is the chief thing, especially for any creature that is young and tender?
For it is then that it is best molded and takes the impression that one wishes to stamp upon it."
"Quite so."
"Shall we, then, thus lightly suffer our children to listen to any chance stories fashioned by any chance teachers and so to take into their minds opinions for the most part contrary to those that we shall think it desirable for them to hold when they are grown up?"
"By no manner of means will we allow it."
"We must begin, then, it seems, by a censorship over our storymakers, and what they do well we must pass and what not, reject.
And the stories on the accepted list we will induce nurses and mothers to tell to the children and so shape their souls by these stories far rather than their bodies by their hands.
But most of the stories they now tell we must reject."
"What sort of stories?"
he said.
"The example of the greater stories," I said, "will show us the lesser also.
For surely the pattern must be the same and the greater and the less must have a like tendency.
Don't you think so?"
"I do," he said;
"but I don't apprehend which you mean by the greater, either."
"Those," I said, "that Hesiod and Homer and the other poets related.
These, methinks, composed false stories which they told and still tell to mankind."
"Of what sort?"
he said;
"and what in them do you find fault?"
"With that," I said, "which one ought first and chiefly to blame, especially if the lie is not a pretty one."
"What is that?"
"When anyone images badly in his speech the true nature of gods and heroes, like a painter whose portraits bear no resemblance to his models."
"It is certainly right to condemn things like that," he said;
"but just what do we mean and what particular things?"
"There is, first of all," I said, "the greatest lie about the things of greatest concernment, which was no pretty invention of him who told how Uranus did what Hesiod says he did to Cronos, and how Cronos in turn took his revenge;
and then there are the doings and sufferings of Cronos at the hands of his son.
Even if they were true I should not think that they ought to be thus lightly told to thoughtless young persons.
But the best way would be to bury them in silence,
and if there were some necessity for relating them, that only a very small audience should be admitted under pledge of secrecy and after sacrificing, not a pig, but some huge and unprocurable victim, to the end that as few as possible should have heard these tales."
"Why, yes," said he, "such stories are hard sayings."
"Yes, and they are not to be told, Adeimantus, in our city,
nor is it to be said in the hearing of a young man, that in doing the utmost wrong he would do nothing to surprise anybody, nor again in punishing his father's wrong-doings to the limit, but would only be following the example of the first and greatest of the gods."
"No, by heaven," said he, "I do not myself think that they are fit to be told."
"Neither must we admit at all," said I, "that gods war with gods and plot against one another and contend for it is not true either
if we wish our future guardians to deem nothing more shameful than lightly to fall out with one another;
still less must we make battles of gods and giants the subject for them of stories and embroideries, and other enmities many and manifold of gods and heroes toward their kith and kin.
But if there is any likelihood of our persuading them that no citizen ever quarrelled with his fellow-citizen and that the very idea of it is an impiety, that is the sort of thing that ought rather to be said by their elders, men and women, to children from the beginning and as they grow older, and we must compel the poets to keep close to this in their compositions.
But Hera's fetterings by her son and the hurling out of heaven of Hephaestus by his father when he was trying to save his mother from a beating, and the battles of the gods in Homer's verse are things that we must not admit into our city either wrought in allegory or without allegory.
For the young are not able to distinguish what is and what is not allegory, but whatever opinions are taken into the mind at that age are wont to prove indelible and unalterable.
For which reason, maybe, we should do our utmost that the first stories that they hear should be so composed as to bring the fairest lessons of virtue to their ears."
"Yes, that is reasonable," he said;
"but if again someone should ask us to be specific and say what these compositions may be and what are the tales, what could we name?"
And I replied,
"Adeimantus, we are not poets, you and I at present, but founders of a state.
And to founders it pertains to know the patterns on which poets must compose their fables and from which their poems must not be allowed to deviate;
but the founders are not required themselves to compose fables."
"Right," he said;
"but this very thing the patterns or norms of right speech about the gods, what would they be?"
"Something like this," I said.
"The true quality of God we must always surely attribute to him whether we compose in epic, melic, or tragic verse."
"We must."
"And is not God of course good in reality and always to be spoken of as such?"
"Certainly."
"But further, no good thing is harmful, is it?"
"I think not."
"Can what is not harmful harm?"
"By no means."
"Can that which does not harm do any evil?"
"Not that either."
"But that which does no evil would not be cause of any evil either?"
"How could it?"
"Once more, is the good beneficent?"
"Yes."
"It is the cause, then, of welfare?"
"Yes."
"Then the good is not the cause of all things, but of things that are well it the cause of things that are ill it is blameless."
"Entirely so,"
he said.
"Neither, then, could God," said I, "since he is good, be, as the multitude say, the cause of all things,
but for mankind he is the cause of few things, but of many things not the cause.
For good things are far fewer with us than evil,
and for the good we must assume no other cause than God, but the cause of evil we must look for in other things and not in God."
"What you say seems to me most true," he replied.
"Then," said I, "we must not accept from Homer or any other poet the folly of such error as this about the gods when he says
"'Two urns stand on the floor of the palace of Zeus and are filled with dooms he allots, one of blessings, the other of gifts that are evil,
and to whomsoever Zeus gives of both commingled now upon evil he chances and now again good is his portion,
but the man for whom he does not blend the lots, but to whom he gives unmixed evil hunger devouring drives him, a wanderer over the wide world,
nor will we tolerate the saying that "Zeus is dispenser alike of good and of evil to mortals."
"But as to the violation of the oaths and the truce by Pandarus, if anyone affirms it to have been brought about by the action of Athena and Zeus, we will not approve, nor that the strife and contention of the gods was the doing of Themis and Zeus;
nor again must we permit our youth to hear what Aeschylus says "'A god implants the guilty cause in men when he would utterly destroy a house.''"
But if any poets compose a 'Sorrows of Niobe,' the poem that contains these iambics, or a tale of the Pelopidae or of Troy, or anything else of the kind,
we must either forbid them to say that these woes are the work of God, or they must devise some such interpretation as we now require, and must declare that what God did was righteous and good, and they were benefited by their chastisement.
But that they were miserable who paid the penalty, and that the doer of this was God, is a thing that the poet must not be suffered to say;
if on the other hand he should say that for needing chastisement the wicked were miserable and that in paying the penalty they were benefited by God, that we must allow.
But as to saying that God, who is good, becomes the cause of evil to anyone, we must contend in every way that neither should anyone assert this in his own city if it is to be well governed, nor anyone hear it, neither younger nor older, neither telling a story in meter or without meter;
for neither would the saying of such things, if they are said, be holy, nor would they be profitable to us or concordant with themselves."
"I cast my vote with yours for this law," he said, "and am well pleased with it."
"This, then," said I, "will be one of the laws and patterns concerning the gods to which speakers and poets will be required to conform, that God is not the cause of all things, but only of the good."
"And an entirely satisfactory one," he said.
"And what of this, the second.
Do you think that God is a wizard and capable of manifesting himself by design, now in one aspect, now in another, at one time himself changing and altering his shape in many transformations and at another deceiving us and causing us to believe such things about him; or that he is simple and less likely than anything else to depart from his own form?"
"I cannot say offhand," he replied.
"But what of this: If anything went out from its own form, would it not be displaced and changed, either by itself or by something else?"
"Necessarily."
"Is it not true that to be altered and moved by something else happens least to things that are in the best condition, as, for example, a body by food and drink and toil, and plants by the heat of the sun and winds and similar influences is it not true that the healthiest and strongest is least altered?"
"Certainly."
"And is it not the soul that is bravest and most intelligent, that would be least disturbed and altered by any external affection?"
"Yes."
"And, again, it is surely true of all composite implements, edifices, and habiliments, by parity of reasoning, that those which are well made and in good condition are least liable to be changed by time and other influences."
"That is so."
"It is universally true, then, that that which is in the best state by nature or art or both admits least alteration by something else."
"So it seems."
"But God, surely, and everything that belongs to God is in every way in the best possible state."
"Of course."
"From this point of view, then, it would be least of all likely that there would be many forms in God."
"Least indeed."
"But would he transform and alter himself?"
"Obviously," he said, "if he is altered."
"Then does he change himself for the better and to something fairer, or for the worse and to something uglier than himself?"
"It must necessarily," said he, "be for the worse if he is changed.
For we surely will not say that God is deficient in either beauty or excellence."
"Most rightly spoken," said I.
"And if that were his condition, do you think, Adeimantus, that any one god or man would of his own will worsen himself in any way?"
"Impossible,"
he replied.
"It is impossible then," said I, "even for a god to wish to alter himself, but, as it appears, each of them being the fairest and best possible abides for ever simply in his own form."
"An absolutely necessary conclusion to my thinking."
"No poet then," I said, "my good friend, must be allowed to tell us that "The gods, in the likeness of strangers, many disguises assume as they visit the cities of mortals."
Nor must anyone tell falsehoods about Proteus and Thetis, nor in any tragedy or in other poems bring in Hera disguised as a priestess collecting alms "for the life-giving sons of Inachus, the Argive stream."
And many similar falsehoods they must not tell.
Nor again must mothers under the influence of such poets terrify their children with harmful tales, how that there are certain gods whose apparitions haunt the night in the likeness of many strangers from all manner of lands, lest while they speak evil of the gods they at the same time make cowards of children."
"They must not,"
he said.
"But," said I, "may we suppose that while the gods themselves are incapable of change they cause us to fancy that they appear in many shapes deceiving and practicing magic upon us?"
"Perhaps,"
said he.
"Consider," said I; "would a god wish to deceive, or lie, by presenting in either word or action what is only appearance?"
"I don't know,"
said he.
"Don't you know," said I, "that the veritable lie, if the expression is permissible, is a thing that all gods and men abhor?"
"What do you mean?" he said.
"This," said I, "that falsehood in the most vital part of themselves, and about their most vital concerns, is something that no one willingly accepts, but it is there above all that everyone fears it."
"I don't understand yet either."
"That is because you suspect me of some grand meaning," I said;
"but what I mean is, that deception in the soul about realities, to have been deceived and to be blindly ignorant and to have and hold the falsehood there, is what all men would least of all accept, and it is in that case that they loathe it most of all."
"Quite so,"
he said.
"But surely it would be most wholly right, as I was just now saying, to describe this as in very truth falsehood ignorance namely in the soul of the man deceived.
For the falsehood in words is a copy of the affection in the soul, an after-rising image of it and not an altogether unmixed falsehood. Is not that so?"
"By all means."
"Essential falsehood, then, is hated not only by gods but by men."
"I agree."
"But what of the falsehood in words,
when and for whom is it serviceable so as not to merit abhorrence?
Will it not be against enemies? And when any of those whom we call friends owing to madness or folly attempts to do some wrong, does it not then become useful to avert the evil as a medicine?
And also in the fables of which we were just now speaking owing to our ignorance of the truth about antiquity, we liken the false to the true as far as we may and so make it edifying."
"We most certainly do," he said.
"Tell me, then, on which of these grounds falsehood would be serviceable to God.
Would he because of his ignorance of antiquity make false likenesses of it?"
"An absurd supposition, that," he said.
"Then there is no lying poet in God."
"I think not."
"Well then, would it be through fear of his enemies that he would lie?"
"Far from it."
"Would it be because of the folly or madness of his friends?"
"Nay, no fool or madman is a friend of God."
"Then there is no motive for God to deceive."
"None."
"From every point of view the divine and the divinity are free from falsehood."
"By all means."
"Then God is altogether simple and true in deed and word, and neither changes himself nor deceives others by visions or words or the sending of signs in waking or in dreams."
"I myself think so," he said, "when I hear you say it."
"You concur then," I said, "this as our second norm or canon for speech and poetry about the gods, that they are neither wizards in shape-shifting nor do they mislead us by falsehoods in words or deed?"
"I concur."
"Then, though there are many other things that we praise in Homer, this we will not applaud, the sending of the dream by Zeus to Agamemnon, nor shall we approve of Aeschylus when his Thetis asserts that Apollo singing at her wedding, "'foretold the happy fortunes of her issue'"
'Their days prolonged, from pain and sickness free, and rounding out the tale of heaven's blessings, raised the proud paean, making glad my heart.
And I believed that Phoebus' mouth divine, filled with the breath of prophecy, could not lie.
But he himself, the singer, himself who sat at meat with us, himself who promised all, is now himself the slayer of my son.''
When anyone says that sort of thing about the gods, we shall be wroth with him, we will refuse him a chorus, neither will we allow teachers to use him for the education of the young if our guardians are to be god-fearing men and god-like in so far as that is possible for humanity."
"By all means," he said, "I accept these norms and would use them as canons and laws."
"Concerning the gods then," said I, "this is the sort of thing that we must allow or not allow them to hear from childhood up, if they are to honor the gods and their fathers and mothers, and not to hold their friendship with one another in light esteem."
"That was our view and I believe it right."
"What then of this?
If they are to be brave, must we not extend our prescription to include also the sayings that will make them least likely to fear death?
Or do you suppose that anyone could ever become brave who had that dread in his heart?"
"No indeed, I do not," he replied.
"And again if he believes in the reality of the underworld and its terrors, do you think that any man will be fearless of death and in battle will prefer death to defeat and slavery?"
"By no means."
"Then it seems we must exercise supervision also, in the matter of such tales as these, over those who undertake to supply them and request them not to dispraise in this undiscriminating fashion the life in Hades but rather praise it, since what they now tell us is neither true nor edifying to men who are destined to be warriors."
"Yes, we must,"
he said.
"Then," said I, "beginning with this verse we will expunge everything of the same kind:
"Liefer were I in the fields up above to be serf to another tiller of some poor plot which yields him a scanty subsistence, than to be ruler and king over all the dead who have perished,
and this:
"Lest unto men and immortals the homes of the dead be uncovered horrible, noisome, dank, that the gods too hold in abhorrence,"
and:
"Ah me! so it is true that e'en in the dwellings of Hades spirit there is and wraith, but within there is no understanding,"
and this:
"Sole to have wisdom and wit, but the others are shadowy phantoms,
and:
"Forth from his limbs unwilling his spirit flitted to Hades, wailing its doom and its lustihood lost and the May of its manhood,
and:
"Under the earth like a vapor vanished the gibbering soul,
and:
"Even as bats in the hollow of some mysterious grotto fly with a flittermouse shriek when one of them falls from the cluster whereby they hold to the rock and are clinging the one to the other, flitted their gibbering ghosts.
We will beg Homer and the other poets not to be angry if we cancel those and all similar passages, not that they are not poetic and pleasing to most hearers, but because the more poetic they are the less are they suited to the ears of boys and men who are destined to be free and to be more afraid of slavery than of death."
"By all means."
"Then we must further taboo in these matters the entire vocabulary of terror and fear, Cocytus named of lamentation loud, abhorred Styx, the flood of deadly hate, the people of the infernal pit and of the charnel-house, and all other terms of this type, whose very names send a shudder through all the hearers every year.
And they may be excellent for other purposes,
but we are in fear for our guardians lest the habit of such thrills make them more sensitive and soft than we would have them."
"And we are right in so fearing."
"We must remove those things then?"
"Yes."
"And the opposite type to them is what we must require in speech and in verse?"
"Obviously."
"And shall we also do away with the wailings and lamentations of men of repute?"
"That necessarily follows," he said, "from the other."
"Consider," said I, "whether we shall be right in thus getting rid of them or not.
What we affirm is that a good man will not think that for a good man, whose friend he also is, death is a terrible thing."
"Yes, we say that."
"Then it would not be for his friend's sake as if he had suffered something dreadful that he would make lament."
"Certainly not."
"But we also say this, that such a one is most of all men sufficient unto himself for a good life and is distinguished from other men in having least need of anybody else."
"True,"
he replied.
"Least of all then to him is it a terrible thing to lose son or brother or his wealth or anything of the sort."
"Least of all."
"Then he makes the least lament and bears it most moderately when any such misfortune overtakes him."
"Certainly."
"Then we should be right in doing away with the lamentations of men of note and in attributing them to women, and not to the most worthy of them either, and to inferior men, in that those whom we say we are breeding for the guardianship of the land may disdain to act like these."
"We should be right,"
said he.
"Again then we shall request Homer and the other poets not to portray Achilles, the son of a goddess, as, "Lying now on his side, and then again on his back, and again on his face, and then rising up and drifting distraught on the shore of the waste unharvested ocean,'"
nor ""clutching with both hands the sooty dust and strewing it over his head,""
nor as weeping and lamenting in the measure and manner attributed to him by the poet;
nor yet Priam, near kinsman of the gods, making supplication and rolling in the dung, "calling aloud unto each, by name to each man appealing"
and yet more than this shall we beg of them at least not to describe the gods as lamenting and crying,
"Ah, woe is me, woeful mother who bore to my sorrow the bravest,""
and if they will so picture the gods at least not to have the effrontery to present so unlikely a likeness of the supreme god as to make him say:
"Out on it, dear to my heart is the man whose pursuit around Troy-town
I must behold with my eyes while my spirit is grieving within me,
and:
"Ah, woe is me! of all men to me is Sarpedon the dearest, fated to fall by the hands of Patroclus, Menoitius' offspring."
"For if, dear Adeimantus, our young men should seriously incline to listen to such tales and not laugh at them as unworthy utterances, still less surely would any man be to think such conduct unworthy of himself and to rebuke himself if it occurred to him to do or say anything of that kind, but without shame or restraint full many a dirge for trifles would he chant and many a lament."
"You say most truly," he replied.
"But that must not be, as our reasoning but now showed us, in which we must put our trust until someone convinces with a better reason."
"No, it must not be."
"Again, they must not be prone to laughter.
For ordinarily when one abandons himself to violent laughter his condition provokes a violent reaction."
"I think so,"
he said.
"Then if anyone represents men of worth as overpowered by laughter we must accept it, much less if gods."
"Much indeed,"
he replied.
"Then we must not accept from Homer such sayings as these either about the gods:
"Quenchless then was the laughter that rose from the blessed immortals
When they beheld Hephaestus officiously puffing and panting.
- we must not accept it on your view."
"If it pleases you to call it mine," he said; "at any rate we must not accept it."
"But further we must surely prize truth most highly.
For if we were right in what we were just saying and falsehood is in very deed useless to gods, but to men useful as a remedy or form of medicine, it is obvious that such a thing must be assigned to physicians and laymen should have nothing to do with it."
"Obviously,"
he replied.
"The rulers then of the city may, if anybody, fitly lie on account of enemies or citizens for the benefit of the state;
no others may have anything to do with it, but for a layman to lie to rulers of that kind we shall affirm to be as great a sin, nay a greater, than it is for a patient not to tell physician or an athlete his trainer the truth about his bodily condition, or for a man to deceive the pilot about the ship and the sailors as to the real condition of himself or a fellow-sailor, and how they fare."
"Most true,"
he replied.
"If then the ruler catches anybody else in the city lying, any of the craftsmen "Whether a prophet or healer of sickness or joiner of timbers," he will chastise him for introducing a practice as subversive and destructive of a state as it is of a ship."
"He will," he said, "if deed follows upon word."
"Again, will our lads not need the virtue of self-control?"
"Of course."
"And for the multitude are not the main points of self-control these to be obedient to their rulers and themselves to be rulers over the bodily appetites and pleasures of food, drink, and the rest?"
"I think so."
"Then, I take it, we will think well said such sayings as that of Homer's Diomede:
"Friend, sit down and be silent and hark to the word of my bidding,"
and what follows:
"Breathing high spirit the Greeks marched silently fearing their captains,"
and all similar passages."
"Yes, well said."
"But what of this sort of thing? 'Heavy with wine with the eyes of a dog and the heart of a fleet deer,'
and the lines that follow, are these well and other impertinences in prose or verse of private citizens to their rulers?"
"They are not well."
"They certainly are not suitable for youth to hear for the inculcation of self-control.
But if from another point of view they yield some pleasure we must not be surprised,
or what is your view of it?"
"This,"
he said.
"Again, to represent the wisest man as saying that this seems to him the fairest thing in the world,
'When the bounteous tables are standing laden with bread and with meat and the cupbearer ladles the sweet wine out of the mixer and bears it and empties it into the beakers.'
do you think the hearing of that sort of thing will conduce to a young man's temperance or self-control?
or this:
"Hunger is the most piteous death that a mortal may suffer."
Or to hear how Zeus lightly forgot all the designs which he devised, watching while the other gods slept, because of the excitement of his passions, and was so overcome by the sight of Hera that he is not even willing to go to their chamber, but wants to lie with her there on the ground and says that he is possessed by a fiercer desire than when they first consorted with one another, "'Deceiving their dear parents.'"
Nor will it profit them to hear of Hephaestus's fettering Ares and Aphrodite for a like motive."
"No, by Zeus," he said, "I don't think it will."
"But any words or deeds of endurance in the face of all odds attributed to famous men are suitable for our youth to see represented and to hear, such as:
"He smote his breast and chided thus his heart,
Endure, my heart, for worse hast thou endured."
"By all means,"
he said.
"It is certain that we cannot allow our men to be acceptors of bribes or greedy for gain."
"By no means."
"Then they must not chant:
"Gifts move the gods and gifts persuade dread kings."
Nor should we approve Achilles' attendant Phoenix as speaking fairly when he counselled him if he received gifts for it to defend the Achaeans, but without gifts not to lay aside his wrath;
nor shall we think it proper nor admit that Achilles himself was so greedy as to accept gifts from Agamemnon and again to give up a dead body after receiving payment but otherwise to refuse."
"It is not right," he said, "to commend such conduct."
"But, for Homer's sake," said I, "I hesitate to say that it is positively impious to affirm such things of Achilles and to believe them when told by others; or again to believe that he said to Apollo
"Me thou hast baulked, Far-darter, the most pernicious of all gods,
Mightily would I requite thee if only my hands had the power."
And how he was disobedient to the river, who was a god and was ready to fight with him, and again that he said of the locks of his hair, consecrated to her river Spercheius: "'This let me give to take with him my hair to the hero, Patroclus,'" who was a dead body, and that he did so we must believe.
And again the trailings of Hector's body round the grave of Patroclus and the slaughter of the living captives upon his pyre, all these we will affirm to be lies,
nor will we suffer our youth to believe that Achilles, the son of a goddess and of Peleus the most chaste of men, grandson of Zeus, and himself bred under the care of the most sage Cheiron, was of so perturbed a spirit as to be affected with two contradictory maladies, the greed that becomes no free man and at the same time overweening arrogance towards gods and men."
"You are right," he said.
"Neither, then," said I, "must we believe this or suffer it to be said, that Theseus, the son of Poseidon, and Peirithous, the son of Zeus, attempted such dreadful rapes, nor that any other child of a god and hero would have brought himself to accomplish the terrible and impious deeds that they now falsely relate of him.
But we must constrain the poets either to deny that these are their deeds or that they are the children of gods, but not to make both statements or attempt to persuade our youth that the gods are the begetters of evil, and that heroes are no better than men.
For, as we were saying, such utterances are both impious and false.
For we proved, I take it, that for evil to arise from gods is an impossibility."
"Certainly."
"And they are furthermore harmful to those that hear them.
For every man will be very lenient with his own misdeeds if he is convinced that such are and were the actions of "The near-sown seed of gods, close kin to Zeus, for whom on Ida's top, ancestral altars flame to highest heaven, nor in their life-blood fails the fire divine."
For which cause we must put down such fables, lest they breed in our youth great laxity in turpitude."
"Most assuredly."
"What type of discourse remains for our definition of our prescriptions and proscriptions?"
"We have declared the right way of speaking about gods and daemons and heroes and that other world."
"We have."
"Speech, then, about men would be the remainder."
"Obviously."
"It is impossible for us, my friend, to place this here."
"Why?"
"Because I presume we are going to say that so it is that both poets and writers of prose speak wrongly about men in matters of greatest moment, saying that there are many examples of men who, though unjust, are happy, and of just men who are wretched, and that there is profit in injustice if it be concealed, and that justice is the other man's good and your own loss;
and I presume that we shall forbid them to say this sort of thing and command them to sing and fable the opposite. Don't you think so?"
"Nay, I well know it," he said.
"Then, if you admit that I am right, I will say that you have conceded the original point of our inquiry?"
"Rightly apprehended," he said.
"Then, as regards men that speech must be of this kind, that is a point that we will agree upon when we have discovered the nature of justice and the proof that it is profitable to its possessor whether he does or does not appear to be just."
"Most true," he replied.
"So this concludes the topic of tales.
That of diction, I take it, is to be considered next.
So we shall have completely examined both the matter and the manner of speech."
And Adeimantus said, "I don't understand what you mean by this."
"Well," said I, "we must have you understand.
Perhaps you will be more likely to apprehend it thus.
Is not everything that is said by fabulists or poets a narration of past, present, or future things?"
"What else could it be?" he said.
"Do not they proceed either by pure narration or by a narrative that is effected through imitation, or by both?"
"This too," he said, "I still need to have made plainer."
"I seem to be a ridiculous and obscure teacher," I said; "so like men who are unable to express themselves I won't try to speak in wholes and universals but will separate off a particular part and by the example of that try to show you my meaning.
Tell me.
Do you know the first lines if the Iliad in which the poet says that Chryses implored Agamemnon to release his daughter, and that the king was angry and that Chryses, failing of his request, imprecated curses on the Achaeans in his prayers to the god?"
"I do."
"You know then that as far as these verses, 'And prayed unto all the Achaeans, chiefly to Atreus' sons, twin leaders who marshalled the people,' the poet himself is the speaker and does not even attempt to suggest to us that anyone but himself is speaking.
But what follows he delivers as if he were himself Chryses and tries as far as may be to make us feel that not Homer is the speaker, but the priest, an old man.
And in this manner he has carried in nearly all the rest of his narration about affairs in Ilion, all that happened in Ithaca, and the entire Odyssey."
"Quite so,"
he said.
"Now, it is narration, is it not, both when he presents the several speeches and the matter between the speeches?"
"Of course."
"But when he delivers a speech as if he were someone else, shall we not say that he then assimilates thereby his own diction is far as possible to that of the person whom he announces as about to speak?"
"We shall obviously."
"And is not likening one's self to another speech or bodily bearing an imitation of him to whom one likens one's self?"
"Surely."
"In such case then it appears he and the other poets effect their narration through imitation."
"Certainly."
"But if the poet should conceal himself nowhere, then his entire poetizing and narration would have been accomplished without imitation.
And lest you may say again that you don't understand, I will explain to you how this would be done.
If Homer, after telling us that Chryses came with the ransom of his daughter and as a suppliant of the Achaeans but chiefly of the kings, had gone on speaking not as if made or being Chryses but still as Homer, you are aware that it would not be imitation but narration, pure and simple.
It would have been somewhat in this wise.
I will state it without meter
for I am not a poet:
the priest came and prayed that to them the gods should grant to take Troy and come safely home, but that they should accept the ransom and release his daughter, out of reverence for the god,
and when he had thus spoken the others were of reverent mind and approved,
but Agamemnon was angry and bade him depart and not come again lest the scepter and the crowns of the god should not avail him.
And ere his daughter should be released, he said, she would grow old in Argos with himself,
and he ordered him to be off and not vex him if he wished to get home safe.
And the old man on hearing this was frightened and departed in silence,
and having gone apart from the camp he prayed at length to Apollo, invoking the appellations of the god, and reminding him of and asking requital for any of his gifts that had found favor whether in the building of temples or the sacrifice of victims.
In return for these things he prayed that the Achaeans should suffer for his tears by the god's shafts.
It is in this way, my dear fellow," I said, "that without imitation simple narration results."
"I understand,"
he said.
"Understand then," said I, "that the opposite of this arises when one removes the words of the poet between and leaves the alternation of speeches."
"This too I understand," he said, " it is what happens in tragedy."
"You have conceived me most rightly," I said, "and now I think I can make plain to you what I was unable to before, that there is one kind of poetry and tale-telling which works wholly through imitation, as you remarked, tragedy and comedy; and another which employs the recital of the poet himself, best exemplified, I presume, in the dithyramb; and there is again that which employs both, in epic poetry and in many other places, if you apprehend me."
"I understand now," he said, "what you then meant."
"Recall then also the preceding statement that we were done with the 'what' of speech and still had to consider the 'how.'"
"I remember."
"What I meant then was just this, that we must reach a decision whether we are to suffer our poets to narrate as imitators or in part as imitators and in part not, and what sort of things in each case, or not allow them to imitate at all."
"I divine," he said, "that you are considering whether we shall admit tragedy and comedy into our city or not."
"Perhaps," said I, "and perhaps even more than that.
For I certainly do not yet know myself, but whithersoever the wind, as it were, of the argument blows, there lies our course."
"Well said," he replied.
"This then, Adeimantus, is the point we must keep in view, do we wish our guardians to be good mimics or not?
Or is this also a consequence of what we said before, that each one could practise well only one pursuit and not many, but if he attempted the latter, dabbling in many things, he would fail of distinction in all?"
"Of course it is."
"And does not the same rule hold for imitation, that the same man is not able to imitate many things well as he can one?"
"No, he is not."
"Still less, then, will he be able to combine the practice of any worthy pursuit with the imitation of many things and the quality of a mimic; since, unless I mistake, the same men cannot practise well at once even the two forms of imitation that appear most nearly akin, as the writing of tragedy and comedy?
Did you not just now call these two imitations?"
"I did, and you are right in saying that the same men are not able to succeed in both,
nor yet to be at once good rhapsodists and actors."
"True."
"But neither can the same men be actors for tragedies and comedies and all these are imitations, are they not?"
"Yes, imitations."
"And to still smaller coinage than this, in my opinion, Adeimantus, proceeds the fractioning of human faculty, so as to be incapable of imitating many things or of doing the things themselves of which the imitations are likenesses."
"Most true,"
he replied.
"If, then, we are to maintain our original principle, that our guardians, released from all other crafts, are to be expert craftsmen of civic liberty, and pursue nothing else that does not conduce to this, it would not be fitting for these to do nor yet to imitate anything else.
But if they imitate they should from childhood up imitate what is appropriate to them men, that is, who are brave, sober, pious, free and all things of that kind;
but things unbecoming the free man they should neither do nor be clever at imitating, nor yet any other shameful thing, lest from the imitation they imbibe the reality.
Or have you not observed that imitations, if continued from youth far into life, settle down into habits and (second) nature in the body, the speech, and the thought?"
"Yes, indeed,"
said he.
"We will not then allow our charges, whom we expect to prove good men, being men, to play the parts of women and imitate a woman young or old wrangling with her husband, defying heaven, loudly boasting, fortunate in her own conceit, or involved in misfortune and possessed by grief and lamentation still less a woman that is sick, in love, or in labor."
"Most certainly not,"
he replied.
"Nor may they imitate slaves, female and male, doing the offices of slaves."
"No, not that either."
"Nor yet, as it seems, bad men who are cowards and who do the opposite of the things we just now spoke of, reviling and lampooning one another, speaking foul words in their cups or when sober and in other ways sinning against themselves and others in word and deed after the fashion of such men.
And I take it they must not form the habit of likening themselves to madmen either in words nor yet in deeds.
For while knowledge they must have both of mad and bad men and women, they must do and imitate nothing of this kind."
"Most true,"
he said.
"What of this?" I said, " are they to imitate smiths and other craftsmen or the rowers of triremes and those who call the time to them or other things connected therewith?"
"How could they," he said, "since it will be forbidden them even to pay any attention to such things?"
"Well, then, neighing horses and lowing bulls, and the noise of rivers and the roar of the sea and the thunder and everything of that kind will they imitate these?"
"Nay, they have been forbidden," he said, "to be mad or liken themselves to madmen."
"If, then, I understand your meaning," said I, "there is a form of diction and narrative in which the really good and true man would narrate anything that he had to say, and another form unlike this to which the man of the opposite birth and breeding would cleave and which he would tell his story."
"What are these forms?" he said.
"A man of the right sort, I think, when he comes in the course of his narrative to some word or act of a good man will be willing to impersonate the other in reporting it, and will feel no shame at that kind of mimicry, by preference imitating the good man when he acts steadfastly and sensibly, and less and more reluctantly when he is upset by sickness or love or drunkenness or any other mishap.
But when he comes to someone unworthy of himself, he will not wish to liken himself in earnest to one who is inferior, except in the few cases where he is doing something good, but will be embarrassed both because he is unpractised in the mimicry of such characters, and also because he shrinks in distaste from molding and fitting himself the types of baser things.
His mind disdains them, unless it be for jest."
"Naturally,"
he said.
"Then the narrative that he will employ will be the kind that we just now illustrated by the verses of Homer, and his diction will be one that partakes of both, of imitation and simple narration, but there will be a small portion of imitation in a long discourse or is there nothing in what I say?"
"Yes, indeed," he said, that is the type and pattern of such a speaker."
"Then," said I, "the other kind speaker, the more debased he is the less will he shrink from imitating anything and everything.
He will think nothing unworthy of himself, so that he will attempt, seriously and in the presence of many, to imitate all things, including those we just now mentioned claps of thunder, and the noise of wind and hail and axles and pulleys, and the notes of trumpets and flutes and pan-pipes, and the sounds of all instruments, and the cries of dogs, sheep, and birds;
and so his style will depend wholly on imitation in voice and gesture, or will contain but a little of pure narration."
"That too follows of necessity," he said.
"These, then," said I, "were the two types of diction of which I was asking."
"There are those two,"
he replied.
"Now does not one of the two involve slight variations,
and if we assign a suitable pitch and rhythm to the diction, is not the result that the right speaker speaks almost on the same note and in one cadence for the changes are slight and similarly in a rhythm of nearly the same kind?"
"Quite so."
"But what of the other type?
Does it not require the opposite, every kind of pitch and all rhythms, if it too is to have appropriate expression, since it involves manifold forms of variation?"
"Emphatically so."
"And do all poets and speakers hit upon one type or the other of diction or some blend which they combine of both?"
"They must,"
he said.
"What, then," said I, are we to do?
Shall we admit all of these into the city, or one of the unmixed types, or the mixed type?"
"If my vote prevails," he said, "the unmixed imitator of the good."
"Nay, but the mixed type also is pleasing, Adeimantus, and far most pleasing to boys and their tutors and the great mob is the opposite of your choice."
"Most pleasing it is."
"But perhaps," said I, "you would affirm it to be ill-suited to our polity, because there is no twofold or manifold man among us, since every man does one thing."
"It is not suited."
"And is this not the reason why such a city is the only one in which we shall find the cobbler a cobbler and not a pilot in addition to his cobbling, and the farmer a farmer and not a judge added to his farming, and the soldier a soldier and not a money-maker in addition to his soldiery, and so of all the rest?"
"True,"
he said.
"If a man, then, it seems, who was capable by his cunning of assuming every kind of shape and imitating all things should arrive in our city, bringing with himself the poems which he wished to exhibit, we should fall down and worship him as a holy and wondrous and delightful creature, but should say to him that there is no man of that kind among us in our city, nor is it lawful for such a man to arise among us,
and we should send him away to another city, after pouring myrrh down over his head and crowning him with bands of wool, but we ourselves, for our souls' good, should continue to employ the more austere and less delightful poet and tale-teller, who would imitate the diction of the good man and would tell his tale in the patterns which we prescribed in the beginning, when we set out to educate our soldiers."
"We certainly should do that if it rested with us."
"And now, my friend," said I, "we may say that we have completely finished the part of music that concerns speeches and tales.
For we have set forth what is to be said and how it is to be said."
"I think so too,"
he replied.
"After this, then," said I, "comes the manner of song and tunes?"
"Obviously."
"And having gone thus far, could not everybody discover what we must say of their character in order to conform to what has already been said?"
"I am afraid that 'everybody' does not include me," laughed Glaucon; "I cannot sufficiently divine off-hand what we ought to say, though I have a suspicion."
"You certainly, I presume," said I, "have sufficient a understanding of this that the song is composed of three things, the words, the tune, and the rhythm?"
"Yes," said he, "that much."
"And so far as it is words, it surely in no manner differs from words not sung in the requirement of conformity to the patterns and manner that we have prescribed?"
"True,"
he said.
"And again, the music and the rhythm must follow the speech."
"Of course."
"But we said we did not require dirges and lamentations in words."
"We do not."
"What, then, are the dirge-like modes of music?
Tell me, for you are a musician."
"The mixed Lydian," he said, "and the tense or higher Lydian, and similar modes."
"These, then," said I, "we must do away with.
For they are useless even to women who are to make the best of themselves, let alone to men."
"Assuredly."
"But again, drunkenness is a thing most unbefitting guardians, and so is softness and sloth."
"Yes."
"What, then, are the soft and convivial modes?"
"There are certain Ionian and also Lydian modes that are called lax."
"Will you make any use of them for warriors?"
"None at all," he said;
"but it would seem that you have left the Dorian and the Phrygian."
"I don't know the musical modes," I said, "but leave us that mode that would fittingly imitate the utterances and the accents of a brave man who is engaged in warfare or in any enforced business, and who, when he has failed, either meeting wounds or death or having fallen into some other mishap, in all these conditions confronts fortune with steadfast endurance and repels her strokes.
And another for such a man engaged in works of peace, not enforced but voluntary, either trying to persuade somebody of something and imploring him whether it be a god, through prayer, or a man, by teaching and admonition or contrariwise yielding himself to another who petitioning or teaching him or trying to change his opinions, and in consequence faring according to his wish, and not bearing himself arrogantly, but in all this acting modestly and moderately and acquiescing in the outcome.
Leave us these two modes the forced and the voluntary that will best imitate the utterances of men failing or succeeding, the temperate, the brave leave us these."
"Well," said he, "you are asking me to leave none other than those I just spoke of."
"Then," said I, "we shall not need in our songs and airs instruments of many strings or whose compass includes all the harmonies."
"Not in my opinion," said he.
"Then we shall not maintain makers of triangles and harps and all other many stringed and poly-harmonic instruments."
"Apparently not."
"Well, will you admit to the city flute-makers and flute-players?
Or is not the flute the most 'many-stringed' of instruments and do not the pan-harmonics themselves imitate it?"
"Clearly,"
he said.
"You have left," said I, "the lyre and the cither. These are useful in the city, and in the fields the shepherds would have a little piccolo to pipe on."
"So our argument indicates," he said.
"We are not innovating, my friend, in preferring Apollo and the instruments of Apollo to Marsyas and his instruments."
"No, by heaven!" he said, "I think not."
"And by the dog," said I, "we have all unawares purged the city which a little while ago we said was wanton."
"In that we show our good sense,"
he said.
"Come then, let us complete the purification.
For upon harmonies would follow the consideration of rhythms:
we must not pursue complexity nor great variety in the basic movements, but must observe what are the rhythms of a life that is orderly and brave, and after observing them require the foot and the air to conform to that kind of man's speech and not the speech to the foot and the tune.
What those rhythms would be, it is for you to tell us as you did the musical modes."
"Nay, in faith," he said, "I cannot tell.
For that there are some three forms from which the feet are combined, just as there are four in the notes of the voice whence come all harmonies, is a thing that I have observed and could tell.
But which are imitations of which sort of life, I am unable to say."
"Well," said I, "on this point we will take counsel with Damon, too, as to which are the feet appropriate to illiberality, and insolence or madness or other evils, and what rhythms we must leave for their opposites;
and I believe I have heard him obscurely speaking of a foot that he called the enoplios, a composite foot, and a dactyl and an heroic foot, which he arranged, I know not how, to be equal up and down in the interchange of long and short,
and unless I am mistaken he used the term iambic, and there was another foot that he called the trochaic, and he added the quantities long and short.
And in some of these, I believe, he censured and commended the tempo of the foot no less than the rhythm itself, or else some combination of the two;
I can't say.
But, as I said, let this matter be postponed for Damon's consideration.
For to determine the truth of these would require no little discourse.
Do you think otherwise?"
"No, by heaven, I do not."
"But this you are able to determine that seemliness and unseemliness are attendant upon the good rhythm and the bad."
"Of course."
"And, further, that good rhythm and bad rhythm accompany, the one fair diction, assimilating itself thereto, and the other the opposite, and so of the apt and the unapt, if, as we were just now saying, the rhythm and harmony follow the words and not the words these."
"They certainly must follow the speech," he said.
"And what of the manner of the diction, and the speech?" said I.
"Do they not follow and conform to the disposition of the soul?"
"Of course."
"And all the rest to the diction?"
"Yes."
"Good speech, then, good accord, and good grace, and good rhythm wait upon good disposition, not that weakness of head which we euphemistically style goodness of heart, but the truly good and fair disposition of the character and the mind."
"By all means,"
he said.
"And must not our youth pursue these everywhere if they are to do what it is truly theirs to do?"
"They must indeed."
"And there is surely much of these qualities in painting and in all similar craftsmanship weaving is full of them and embroidery and architecture and likewise the manufacture of household furnishings and thereto the natural bodies of animals and plants as well.
For in all these there is grace or gracelessness.
And gracelessness and evil rhythm and disharmony are akin to evil speaking and the evil temper but the opposites are the symbols and the kin of the opposites, the sober and good disposition."
"Entirely so,"
he said.
"Is it, then, only the poets that we must supervise and compel to embody in their poems the semblance of the good character or else not write poetry among us,
or must we keep watch over the other craftsmen, and forbid them to represent the evil disposition, the licentious, the illiberal, the graceless, either in the likeness of living creatures or in buildings or in any other product of their art, on penalty, if unable to obey, of being forbidden to practise their art among us,
that our guardians may not be bred among symbols of evil, as it were in a pasturage of poisonous herbs, lest grazing freely and cropping from many such day by day they little by little and all unawares accumulate and build up a huge mass of evil in their own souls.
But we must look for those craftsmen who by the happy gift of nature are capable of following the trail of true beauty and grace, that our young men, dwelling as it were in a salubrious region, may receive benefit from all things about them, whence the influence that emanates from works of beauty may waft itself to eye or ear like a breeze that brings from wholesome places health,
and so from earliest childhood insensibly guide them to likeness, to friendship, to harmony with beautiful reason."
"Yes," he said, "that would be far the best education for them."
"And is it not for this reason, Glaucon," said I, "that education in music is most sovereign, because more than anything else rhythm and harmony find their way to the inmost soul and take strongest hold upon it, bringing with them and imparting grace, if one is rightly trained, and otherwise the contrary?
And further, because omissions and the failure of beauty in things badly made or grown would be most quickly perceived by one who was properly educated in music,
and so, feeling distaste rightly, he would praise beautiful things and take delight in them and receive them into his soul to foster its growth and become himself beautiful and good.
The ugly he would rightly disapprove of and hate while still young and yet unable to apprehend the reason, but when reason came the man thus nurtured would be the first to give her welcome, for by this affinity he would know her."
"I certainly think," he said, "that such is the cause of education in music."
"It is, then," said I, "as it was when we learned our letters and felt that we knew them sufficiently only when the separate letters did not elude us, appearing as few elements in all the combinations that convey them,
and when we did not disregard them in small things or great and think it unnecessary to recognize them, but were eager to distinguish them everywhere, in the belief that we should never be literate and letter-perfect till we could do this."
"True."
"And is it not also true that if there are any likenesses of letters reflected in water or mirrors, we shall never know them until we know the originals, but such knowledge belongs to the same art and discipline?"
"By all means."
"Then, by heaven, am I not right in saying that by the same token we shall never be true musicians, either neither we nor the guardians that we have undertaken to educate
until we are able to recognize the forms of soberness, courage, liberality, and high-mindedness and all their kindred and their opposites, too, in all the combinations that contain and convey them, and to apprehend them and their images wherever found, disregarding them neither in trifles nor in great things, but believing the knowledge of them to belong to the same art and discipline?"
"The conclusion is inevitable,"
he said.
"Then," said I, "when there is a coincidence of a beautiful disposition in the soul and corresponding and harmonious beauties of the same type in the bodily form is not this the fairest spectacle for one who is capable of its contemplation?"
"Far the fairest."
"And surely the fairest is the most lovable."
"Of course."
"The true musician, then, would love by preference persons of this sort;
but if there were disharmony he would not love this."
"No," he said, "not if there was a defect in the soul;
but if it were in the body he would bear with it and still be willing to bestow his love."
"I understand," I said, "that you have or have had favorites of this sort and I grant your distinction.
But tell me this
can there be any communion between soberness and extravagant pleasure?"
"How could there be," he said, "since such pleasure puts a man beside himself no less than pain?"
"Or between it and virtue generally?"
"By no means."
"But is there between pleasure and insolence and licence?"
"Most assuredly."
"Do you know of greater or keener pleasure than that associated with Aphrodite?"
"I don't," he said, "nor yet of any more insane."
"But is not the right love a sober and harmonious love of the orderly and the beautiful?"
"It is indeed,"
said he.
"Then nothing of madness, nothing akin to licence, must be allowed to come nigh the right love?"
"No."
"Then this kind of pleasure may not come nigh, nor may lover and beloved who rightly love and are loved have anything to do with it?"
"No, by heaven, Socrates," he said, "it must not come nigh them."
"Thus, then, as it seems, you will lay down the law in the city that we are founding, that the lover may kiss and pass the time with and touch the beloved as a father would a son, for honorable ends, if he persuade him.
But otherwise he must so associate with the objects of his care that there should never be any suspicion of anything further, on penalty of being stigmatized for want of taste and true musical culture."
"Even so,"
he said.
"Do you not agree, then, that our discourse on music has come to an end?
It has certainly made a fitting end, for surely the end and consummation of culture be love of the beautiful."
"I concur,"
he said.
"After music our youth are to be educated by gymnastics?"
"Certainly."
"In this too they must be carefully trained from boyhood through life,
and the way of it is this, I believe;
but consider it yourself too.
For I, for my part, do not believe that a sound body by its excellence makes the soul good, but on the contrary that a good soul by its virtue renders the body the best that is possible.
What is your opinion?"
"I think so too."
"Then if we should sufficiently train the mind and turn over to it the minutiae of the care of the body, and content ourselves with merely indicating the norms or patterns, not to make a long story of it, we should acting rightly?"
"By all means."
"From intoxication we said that they must abstain.
For a guardian is surely the last person in the world to whom it is allowable to get drunk and not know where on earth he is."
"Yes," he said, "it would absurd that a guardian should need a guard."
"What next about their food?
These men are athletes in the greatest of contests, are they not?"
"Yes."
"Is, then, the bodily habit of the athletes we see about us suitable for such?"
"Perhaps."
"Nay," said I, "that is a drowsy habit and precarious for health.
Don't you observe that they sleep away their lives, and that if they depart ever so little from their prescribed regimen these athletes are liable to great and violent diseases?"
"I do."
"Then," said I, "we need some more ingenious form of training for our athletes of war,
since these must be as it were sleepless hounds, and have the keenest possible perceptions of sight and hearing, and in their campaigns undergo many changes in their drinking water, their food, and in exposure to the heat of the sun and to storms, without disturbance of their health."
"I think so."
"Would not, then, the best gymnastics be akin to the music that we were just now describing?"
"What do you mean?"
"It would be a simple and flexible gymnastic, and especially so in the training for war."
"In what way?"
"One could learn that," said I, "even from Homer.
For you are aware that in the banqueting of the heroes on campaign he does not feast them on fish, nor on boiled meat, but only on roast, which is what soldiers could most easily procure.
For everywhere, one may say, it is of easier provision to use the bare fire than to convey pots and pans along."
"Indeed it is."
"Neither, as I believe, does Homer ever make mention of sweet meats.
Is not that something which all men in training understand that if one is to keep his body in good condition he must abstain from such things altogether?"
"They are right," he said, "in that they know it and do abstain."
"Then, my friend, if you think this is the right way, you apparently do not approve of a Syracusan table and Sicilian variety of made dishes."
"I think not."
"You would frown, then, on a little Corinthian maid as the chre amie of men who were to keep themselves fit?"
"Most certainly."
"And also on the seeming delights of Attic pastry?"
"Inevitably."
"In general, I take it, if we likened that kind of food and regimen to music and song expressed in the pan-harmonic mode and in every variety of rhythm it would be a fair comparison."
"Quite so."
"And here variety engendered licentiousness, did it not, but here disease?
While simplicity in music begets sobriety in the souls, and in gymnastic training it begets health in bodies."
"Most true,"
he said.
"And when licentiousness and disease multiply in a city, are not many courts of law and dispensaries opened, and the arts of chicane and medicine give themselves airs when even free men in great numbers take them very seriously?"
"How can they help it?"
"Will you be able to find a surer proof of an evil and shameful state of education in a city than the necessity of first-rate physicians and judges, not only for the base and mechanical, but for those who claim to have been bred in the fashion of free men?
Do you not think it disgraceful and a notable mark of bad breeding to have to make use of a justice imported from others, who thus become your masters and judges, from lack of such qualities in yourself?"
"The most shameful thing in the world."
"Is it?" said I, "or is this still more shameful when a man only wears out the better part of his days in the courts of law as defendant or accuser,
but from the lack of all true sense of values is led to plume himself on this very thing, as being a smart fellow to 'put over' an unjust act and cunningly to try every dodge and practice, every evasion, and wriggle out of every hold in defeating justice, and that too for trifles and worthless things,
because he does not know how much nobler and better it is to arrange his life so as to have no need of a nodding juryman?"
"That is," said he, "still more shameful than the other."
"And to require medicine," said I, "not merely for wounds or the incidence of some seasonal maladies, but, because of sloth and such a regimen as we described, to fill one's body up with winds and humors like a marsh and compel the ingenious sons of Aesculapius to invent for diseases such names as fluxes and flatulences don't you think that disgraceful?"
"Those surely are," he said, "new-fangled and monstrous strange names of diseases."
"There was nothing of the kind, I fancy," said I, "in the days of Aesculapius.
I infer this from the fact that at Troy his sons did not find fault with the damsel who gave to the wounded Eurypylus to drink a posset of Pramnian wine plentifully sprinkled with barley and gratings of cheese, inflammatory ingredients of a surety, nor did they censure Patroclus, who was in charge of the case."
"It was indeed," said he, "a strange potion for a man in that condition."
"Not strange," said I, "if you reflect that the former Asclepiads made no use of our modern coddling medication of diseases before the time of Herodicus.
But Herodicus was a trainer and became a valetudinarian, and blended gymnastics and medicine, for the torment first and chiefly of himself and then of many successors."
"How so?"
he said.
"By lingering out his death," said I;
"for living in perpetual observance of his malady, which was incurable, he was not able to effect a cure, but lived through his days unfit for the business of life, suffering the tortures of the damned if he departed a whit from his fixed regimen, and struggling against death by reason of his science he won the prize of a doting old age."
"A noble prize indeed for his science," he said.
"The appropriate one," said I, "for a man who did not know that it was not from ignorance or inacquaintance with this type of medicine that Aesculapius did not discover it to his descendants, but because he knew that for all well-governed peoples there is a work assigned to each man in the city which he must perform, and no one has leisure to be sick and doctor himself all his days.
And this we absurdly enough perceive in the case of a craftsman, but don't see in the case of the rich and so-called fortunate."
"How so?"
he said.
"A carpenter," said I, "when he is sick expects his physician to give him a drug which will operate as an emetic on the disease, or to get rid of it by purging or the use of cautery or the knife.
But if anyone prescribes for him a long course of treatment with swathings about the head and their accompaniments, he hastily says that he has no leisure to be sick and that such a life of preoccupation with his illness and neglect of the work that lies before him isn't worth living.
And thereupon he bids farewell to that kind of physician, enters upon his customary way of life, regains his health, and lives attending to his affairs
or, if his body is not equal to strain, he dies and is freed from all his troubles."
"For such a man," he said, "that appears to be the right use of medicine."
"And is not the reason," I said, "that he had a task and that life wasn't worth acceptance on condition of not doing his work?"
"Obviously,"
he said.
"But the rich man, we say, has no such appointed task, the necessity of abstaining from which renders life intolerable."
"I haven't heard of any."
"Why, haven't you heard that saying of Phocylides, that after a man has 'made his pile' he ought to practice virtue?"
"Before, too, I fancy," he said.
"Let us not quarrel with him on that point," I said, "but inform ourselves whether this virtue is something for the rich man to practise, and life is intolerable if he does not,
or whether we are to suppose that while valetudinarianism is a hindrance to single-minded attention to carpentry and the other arts, it is no obstacle to the fullfilment of Phocylides' exhortation."
"Yes, indeed," he said,
"this excessive care for the body that goes beyond simple gymnastics is the greatest of all obstacles.
For it is troublesome in household affairs and military service and sedentary offices in the city."
"And, chief of all, it puts difficulties in the way of any kind of instruction, thinking, or private meditation, forever imagining headaches and dizziness and attributing their origin to philosophy.
So that wherever this kind of virtue is practiced and tested it is in every way a hindrance.
For it makes the man always fancy himself sick and never cease from anguishing about his body."
"Naturally,"
he said.
"Then, shall we not say that it was because Asclepius knew this that for those who were by nature and course of life sound of body but had some localized disease, that for such, I say, and for this habit he revealed the art of medicine, and, driving out their disease by drugs and surgery, prescribed for them their customary regimen in order not to interfere with their civic duties,
but that, when bodies were diseased inwardly and throughout, he did not attempt by diet and by gradual evacuations and infusions to prolong a wretched existence for the man and have him beget in all likelihood similar wretched offspring?
But if a man was incapable of living in the established round and order of life, he did not think it worth while to treat him, since such a fellow is of no use either to himself or to the state."
"A most politic Asclepius you're telling us of," he said.
"Obviously," said I, "that was his character. And his sons too, don't you in see that at Troy they approved themselves good fighting-men and practised medicine as I described it?
Don't you remember that in the case of Menelaus too from the wound that Pandarus inflicted "'They sucked the blood, and soothing simples sprinkled?'"
But what he was to eat or drink thereafter they no more prescribed than for Eurypylus, taking it for granted that the remedies sufficed to heal men who before their wounds were healthy and temperate in diet even if they did happen for the nonce to drink a posset;
but they thought that the life of a man constitutionally sickly and intemperate was of no use to himself or others, and that the art of medicine should not be for such nor should they be given treatment even if they were richer than Midas."
"Very ingenious fellows," he said, "you make out these sons of Asclepius to be."
"'Tis fitting," said I; "and yet in disregard of our principles the tragedians and Pindar affirm that Asclepius, though he was the son of Apollo, was bribed by gold to heal a man already at the point of death, and that for this cause he was struck by the lightning.
But we in accordance with the aforesaid principles refuse to believe both statements,
but if he was the son of a god he was not avaricious, we will insist, and if he was greedy of gain he was not the son of a god."
"That much," said he, "is most certainly true.
But what have you to say to this, Socrates,
must we not have good physicians in our city?
And they would be the most likely to be good who had treated the greatest number of healthy and diseased men,
and so good judges would be those who had associated with all sorts and conditions of men."
"Most assuredly I want them good," I said;
"but do you know whom I regard as such?"
"I'll know if you tell,"
he said.
"Well, I will try," said I.
"You, however, have put unlike cases in one question."
"How so?"
said he.
"Physicians, it is true," I said, "would prove most skilled if, from childhood up, in addition to learning the principles of the art they had familiarized themselves with the greatest possible number of the most sickly bodies, and if they themselves had suffered all diseases and were not of very healthy constitution.
For you see they do not treat the body by the body.
If they did, it would not be allowable for their bodies to be or to have been in evil condition.
But they treat the body with the mind
and it is not competent for a mind that is or has been evil to treat anything well."
"Right,"
he said.
"But a judge, mark you, my friend, rules soul with soul and it is not allowable for a soul to have been bred from youth up among evil souls and to have grown familiar with them, and itself to have run the gauntlet of every kind of wrong-doing and injustice so as quickly to infer from itself the misdeeds of others as it might diseases in the body,
but it must have been inexperienced in evil natures and uncontaminated by them while young, if it is to be truly fair and good and judge soundly of justice.
For which cause the better sort seem to be simple-minded in youth and are easily deceived by the wicked,
since they do not have within themselves patterns answering to the affections of the bad."
"That is indeed their experience," he said.
"Therefore it is," said I, that the good judge must not be a youth but an old man, a late learner of the nature of injustice, one who has not become aware of it as a property in his own soul, but one who has through the long years trained himself to understand it as an alien thing in alien souls, and to discern how great an evil it is by the instrument of mere knowledge and not by experience of his own."
"That at any rate," he said, "appears to be the noblest kind of judge."
"And what is more, a good one," I said, "which was the gist of your question.
For he who has a good soul is good.
But that cunning fellow quick to suspect evil, and who has himself done many unjust acts and who thinks himself a smart trickster, when he associates with his like does appear to be clever, being on his guard and fixing his eyes on the patterns within himself.
But when the time comes for him to mingle with the good and his elders, then on the contrary he appears stupid.
He is unseasonably distrustful and he cannot recognize a sound character because he has no such pattern in himself.
But since he more often meets with the bad than the good, he seems to himself and to others to be rather wise than foolish."
"That is quite true," he said.
"Well then," said I, "such a one must not be our ideal of the good and wise judge but the former.
For while badness could never come to know both virtue and itself,
native virtue through education will at last acquire the science both of itself and badness.
This one, then, as I think, is the man who proves to be wise and not the bad man."
"And I concur," he said.
"Then will you not establish by law in your city such an art of medicine as we have described in conjunction with this kind of justice?
And these arts will care for the bodies and souls of such of your citizens as are truly well born, but of those who are not, such as are defective in body they will suffer to die and those who are evil-natured and incurable in soul they will themselves put to death."
"This certainly," he said, "has been shown to be the best thing for the sufferers themselves and for the state."
"And so your youths," said I, "employing that simple music which we said engendered sobriety will, it is clear, guard themselves against falling into the need of the justice of the court-room."
"Yes,"
he said.
"And will not our musician, pursuing the same trail in his use of gymnastics, if he please, get to have no need of medicine save when indispensable?"
"I think so."
"And even the exercises and toils of gymnastics he will undertake with a view to the spirited part of his nature to arouse that rather than for mere strength, unlike ordinary athletes, who treat diet and exercise only as a means to muscle."
"Nothing could be truer," he said.
"Then may we not say, Glaucon," said I, "that those who established an education in music and gymnastics had not the purpose in view that some attribute to them in so instituting, namely to treat the body by one and the soul by the other?"
"But what?"
he said.
"It seems likely," I said, "that they ordained both chiefly for the soul's sake."
"How so?"
"Have you not observed," said I, "the effect on the disposition of the mind itself of lifelong devotion to gymnastics with total neglect of music?
Or the disposition of those of the opposite habit?"
"In what respect do you mean?" he said.
"In respect of savagery and hardness or, on the other hand, of softness and gentleness?"
"I have observed," he said, "that the devotees of unmitigated gymnastics turn out more brutal than they should be and those of music softer than is good for them."
"And surely," said I, "this savagery is a quality derived from the high-spirited element in our nature, which, if rightly trained, becomes brave, but if overstrained, would naturally become hard and harsh."
"I think so,"
he said.
"And again, is not the gentleness a quality which the philosophic nature would yield?
This if relaxed too far would be softer than is desirable but if rightly trained gentle and orderly?"
"That is so."
"But our requirement, we say, is that the guardians should possess both natures."
"It is."
"And must they not be harmoniously adjusted to one another?"
"Of course."
"And the soul of the man thus attuned is sober and brave?"
"Certainly."
"And that of the ill adjusted is cowardiy and rude?"
"It surely is."
"Now when a man abandons himself to music to play upon him and pour into his soul as it were through the funnel of his ears those sweet, soft, and dirge-like airs of which we were just now speaking, and gives his entire time to the warblings and blandishments of song,
the first result is that the principle of high spirit, if he had it, is softened like iron and is made useful instead of useless and brittle.
But when he continues the practice without remission and is spellbound, the effect begins to be that he melts and liquefies till he completely dissolves away his spirit, cuts out as it were the very sinews of his soul and makes of himself a 'feeble warrior.'"
"Assuredly,"
he said.
"And if," said I, "he has to begin with a spiritless nature he reaches this result quickly, but if high-spirited, by weakening the spirit he makes it unstable, quickly irritated by slight stimuli, and as quickly quelled.
The outcome is that such men are choleric and irascible instead of high-spirited, and are peevish and discontented."
"Precisely so."
"On the other hand, if a man toils hard at gymnastics and eats right lustily and holds no truck with music and philosophy,
does he not at first get very fit and full of pride and high spirit and become more brave and bold than he was?"
"He does indeed."
"But what if he does nothing but this and has no contact with the Muse in any way,
is not the result that even if there was some principle of the love of knowledge in his soul, since it tastes of no instruction nor of any inquiry and does not participate in any discussion or any other form of culture, it becomes feeble, deaf, and blind, because it is not aroused or fed nor are its perceptions purified and quickened?"
"That is so,"
he said.
"And so such a man, I take it, becomes a misologist and stranger to the Muses.
He no longer makes any use of persuasion by speech but achieves all his ends like a beast by violence and savagery, and in his brute ignorance and ineptitude lives a life of disharmony and gracelessness."
"That is entirely true," he said.
"For these two, then, it seems there are two arts which I would say some god gave to mankind, music and gymnastics for the service of the high-spirited principle and the love of knowledge in them not for the soul and the body except incidentally, but for the harmonious adjustment of these two principles by the proper degree of tension and relaxation of each."
"Yes, so it appears,"
he said.
"Then he who best blends gymnastics with music and applies them most suitably to the soul is the man whom we should most rightly pronounce to be the most perfect and harmonious musician, far rather than the one who brings the strings into unison with one another."
"That seems likely, Socrates," he said.
"And shall we not also need in our city, Glaucon, a permanent overseer of this kind if its constitution is to be preserved?"
"We most certainly shall."
"Such would be the outlines of their education and breeding.
For why should one recite the list of the dances of such citizens, their hunts and chases with hounds, their athletic contests and races?
It is pretty plain that they must conform to these principles and there is no longer any difficulty in discovering them."
"There is, it may be, no difficulty," he said.
"Very well," said I;
"what, then, have we next to determine?
Is it not which ones among them shall be the rulers and the ruled?"
"Certainly."
"That the rulers must be the elder and the ruled the younger is obvious."
"It is."
"And that the rulers must be their best?"
"This too."
"And do not the best of the farmers prove the best farmers?"
"Yes."
"And in this case, since we want them to be the best of the guardians, must they not be the best guardians, the most regardful of the state?"
"Yes."
"They must then to begin with be intelligent in such matters and capable, and furthermore careful of the interests of the state?"
"That is so."
"But one would be most likely to be careful of that which he loved."
"Necessarily."
"And again, one would be most likely to love that whose interests he supposed to coincide with his own, and thought that when it prospered, he too would prosper and if not, the contrary."
"So it is,"
he said.
"Then we must pick out from the other guardians such men as to our observation appear most inclined through the entire course of their lives to be zealous to do what they think for the interest of the state, and who would be least likely to consent to do the opposite."
"That would be a suitable choice,"
he said.
"I think, then, we shall have to observe them at every period of life, to see if they are conservators and guardians of this conviction in their minds and never by sorcery nor by force can be brought to expel from their souls unawares this conviction that they must do what is best for the state."
"What do you mean by the 'expelling'?" he said.
"I will tell you, said I;
"it seems to me that the exit of a belief from the mind is either voluntary or involuntary.
Voluntary is the departure of the false belief from one who learns better, involuntary that of every true belief."
"The voluntary," he said, "I understand, but I need instruction about the involuntary."
"How now," said I, "don't you agree with me in thinking that men are unwillingly deprived of good things but willingly of evil?
Or is it not an evil to be deceived in respect of the truth and a good to possess truth?
And don't you think that to opine the things that are is to possess the truth?"
"Why, yes," said he, "you are right, and I agree that men are unwillingly deprived of true opinions."
"And doesn't this happen to them by theft, by the spells of sorcery or by force?"
"I don't understand now either," he said.
"I must be talking in high tragic style," I said;
"by those who have their opinions stolen from them I mean those who are over-persuaded and those who forget, because in the one case time, in the other argument strips them unawares of their beliefs.
Now I presume you understand, do you not?"
"Yes."
"Well, then, by those who are constrained or forced I mean those whom some pain or suffering compels to change their minds."
"That too I understand and you are right."
"And the victims of sorcery I am sure you too would say are they who alter their opinions under the spell of pleasure or terrified by some fear."
"Yes," he said: "everything that deceives appears to cast a spell upon the mind."
"Well then, as I was just saying, we must look for those who are the best guardians of the indwelling conviction that what they have to do is what they at any time believe to be best for the state.
Then we must observe them from childhood up and propose them tasks in which one would be most likely to forget this principle or be deceived, and he whose memory is sure and who cannot be beguiled we must accept and the other kind we must cross off from our list. Is not that so?"
"Yes."
"And again we must subject them to toils and pains and competitions in which we have to watch for the same traits."
"Right,"
he said.
"Then," said I, "must we not institute a third kind of competitive test with regard to sorcery and observe them in that?
Just as men conduct colts to noises and uproar to see if they are liable to take fright,
so we must bring these lads while young into fears and again pass them into pleasures, testing them much more carefully than men do gold in the fire, to see if the man remains immune to such witchcraft and preserves his composure throughout, a good guardian of himself and the culture which he has received, maintaining the true rhythm and harmony of his being in all those conditions, and the character that would make him most useful to himself and to the state.
And he who as boy, lad, and man endures the test and issues from it unspoiled we must establish as ruler over our city and its guardian, and bestow rewards upon him in life, and in death the allotment of the supreme honors of burial-rites and other memorials.
But the man of the other type we must reject.
Such," said I, "appears to me, Glaucon, the general notion of our selection and appointment of rulers and guardians as sketched in outline, but not drawn out in detail."
"I too," he said, "think much the same."
"Then would it not truly be most proper to designate these as guardians in the full sense of the word, watchers against foemen without and friends within, so that the latter shall not wish and the former shall not be able to work harm, but to name those youths whom we were calling guardians just now, helpers and aids for the decrees of the rulers?"
"I think so," he replied.
"How, then," said I, "might we contrive one of those opportune falsehoods of which we were just now speaking, so as by one noble lie to persuade if possible the rulers themselves, but failing that the rest of the city?"
"What kind of a fiction do you mean?"
said he.
"Nothing unprecedented," said I, "but a sort of Phoenician tale, something that has happened ere now in many parts of the world, as the poets aver and have induced men to believe, but that has not happened and perhaps would not be likely to happen in our day and demanding no little persuasion to make it believable."
"You act like one who shrinks from telling his thought," he said.
"You will think that I have right good reason for shrinking when I have told," I said.
"Say on," said he, "and don't be afraid."
"Very well, I will. And yet I hardly know how to find the audacity or the words to speak and undertake to persuade first the rulers themselves and the soldiers and then the rest of the city, that in good sooth all our training and educating of them were things that they imagined and that happened to them as it were in a dream;
but that in reality at that time they were down within the earth being molded and fostered themselves while their weapons and the rest of their equipment were being fashioned.
And when they were quite finished the earth as being their mother delivered them, and now as if their land were their mother and their nurse they ought to take thought for her and defend her against any attack and regard the other citizens as their brothers and children of the self-same earth."
"It is not for nothing," he said, "that you were so bashful about coming out with your lie."
"It was quite natural that I should be," I said;
"but all the same hear the rest of the story.
While all of you in the city are brothers, we will say in our tale, yet God in fashioning those of you who are fitted to hold rule mingled gold in their generation, for which reason they are the most precious but in the helpers silver, and iron and brass in the farmers and other craftsmen.
And as you are all akin, though for the most part you will breed after your kinds, it may sometimes happen that a golden father would beget a silver son and that a golden offspring would come from a silver sire and that the rest would in like manner be born of one another.
So that the first and chief injunction that the god lays upon the rulers is that of nothing else are they to be such careful guardians and so intently observant as of the intermixture of these metals in the souls of their offspring,
and if sons are born to them with an infusion of brass or iron they shall by no means give way to pity in their treatment of them,
but shall assign to each the status due to his nature and thrust them out among the artisans or the farmers.
And again, if from these there is born a son with unexpected gold or silver in his composition they shall honor such and bid them go up higher, some to the office of guardian, some to the assistanceship, alleging that there is an oracle that the state shall then be overthrown when the man of iron or brass is its guardian.
Do you see any way of getting them to believe this tale?"
"No, not these themselves," he said, "but I do, their sons and successors and the rest of mankind who come after."
"Well," said I, "even that would have a good effect making them more inclined to care for the state and one another.
For I think I apprehend your meaning.
And this shall fall out as tradition guides."
"But let us arm these sons of earth and conduct them under the leadership of their rulers.
And when they have arrived they must look out for the fairest site in the city for their encampment, a position from which they could best hold down rebellion against the laws from within and repel aggression from without as of a wolf against the fold.
And after they have encamped and sacrificed to the proper gods they must make their lairs, must they not?"
"Yes,"
he said.
"And these must be of a character keep out the cold in winter and be sufficient in summer?"
"Of course.
For I presume you are speaking of their houses."
"Yes," said I, "the houses of soldiers not of money-makers."
"What distinction do you intend by that?" he said.
"I will try to tell you," I said.
"It is surely the most monstrous and shameful thing in the world for shepherds to breed the dogs who are to help them with their flocks in such wise and of such a nature that from indiscipline or hunger or some other evil condition the dogs themselves shall attack the sheep and injure them and be likened to wolves instead of dogs."
"A terrible thing, indeed," he said.
"Must we not then guard by every means in our power against our helpers treating the citizens in any such way and, because they are the stronger, converting themselves from benign assistants into savage masters?"
"We must guard,"
he said.
"And would they not have been provided with the chief safeguard if their education has really been a good one?"
"But it surely has,"
he said.
"That," said I, "dear Glaucon, we may not properly affirm, but what we were just now saying we may, that they must have the right education, whatever it is, if they are to have what will do most to make them gentle to one another and to their charges."
"That is right,"
he said.
"In addition, moreover, to such an education a thoughtful man would affirm that their houses and the possessions provided for them ought to be such as not to interfere with the best performance of their own work as guardians and not to incite them to wrong the other citizens."
"He will rightly affirm that."
"Consider then," said I, "whether, if that is to be their character, their habitations and ways of life must not be something after this fashion.
In the first place, none must possess any private property save the indispensable.
Secondly, none must have any habitation or treasure-house which is not open for all to enter at will.
Their food, in such quantities as are needful for athletes of war sober and brave, they must receive as an agreed stipend from the other citizens as the wages of their guardianship, so measured that there shall be neither superfluity at the end of the year nor any lack.
And resorting to a common mess like soldiers on campaign they will live together.
Gold and silver, we will tell them, they have of the divine quality from the gods always in their souls,
and they have no need of the metal of men nor does holiness suffer them to mingle and contaminate that heavenly possession with the acquisition of mortal gold,
since many impious deeds have been done about the coin of the multitude, while that which dwells within them is unsullied.
But for these only of all the dwellers in the city it is not lawful to handle gold and silver and to touch them nor yet to come under the same roof with them, nor to hang them as ornaments on their limbs nor to drink from silver and gold.
So living they would save themselves and save their city.
But whenever they shall acquire for themselves land of their own and houses and coin,
they will be house-holders and farmers instead of guardians, and will be transformed from the helpers of their fellow citizens to their enemies and masters,
and so in hating and being hated, plotting and being plotted against they will pass their days fearing far more and rather the townsmen within than the foemen without and then even then laying the course of near shipwreck for themselves and the state.
For all these reasons," said I, "let us declare that such must be the provision for our guardians in lodging and other respects and so legislate. Shall we not?"
"By all means," said Glaucon.
And Adeimantus broke in and said, "What will be your defence, Socrates, if anyone objects that you are not making these men very happy, and that through their own fault?
For the city really belongs to them and yet they get no enjoyment out of it as ordinary men do by owning lands and building fine big houses and providing them with suitable furniture and winning the favor of the gods by private sacrifices and entertaining guests and enjoying too those possessions which you just now spoke of, gold and silver and all that is customary for those who are expecting to be happy?
But they seem, one might say, to be established in idleness in the city, exactly like hired mercenaries, with nothing to do but keep guard."
"Yes," said I, "and what is more, they serve for board-wages and do not even receive pay in addition to their food as others do, so that they will not even be able to take a journey on their own account, if they wish to, or make presents to their mistresses, or spend money in other directions according to their desires like the men who are thought to be happy.
These and many similar counts of the indictment you are omitting."
"Well," said he, "assume these counts too."
"What then will be our apology you ask?"
"Yes."
"By following the same path I think we shall find what to reply.
For we shall say that while it would not surprise us if these men thus living prove to be the most happy, yet the object on which we fixed our eyes in the establishment of our state was not the exceptional happiness of any one class but the greatest possible happiness of the city as a whole.
For we thought that in a state so constituted we should be most likely to discover justice as we should injustice in the worst governed state, and that when we had made these out we could pass judgement on the issue of our long inquiry.
Our first task then, we take it, is to mold the model of a happy state we are not isolating a small class in it and postulating their happiness, but that of the city as a whole.
But the opposite type of state we will consider presently.
It is as if we were coloring a statue and someone approached and censured us, saying that we did not apply the most beautiful pigments to the most beautiful parts of the image,
since the eyes, which are the most beautiful part, have not been painted with purple but with black
we should think it a reasonable justification to reply,
'Don't expect us, quaint friend, to paint the eyes so fine that they will not be like eyes at all, nor the other parts.
But observe whether by assigning what is proper to each we render the whole beautiful.'
And so in the present case you must not require us to attach to the guardians a happiness that will make them anything but guardians.
For in like manner we could clothe the farmers in robes of state and deck them with gold and bid them cultivate the soil at their pleasure,
and we could make the potters recline on couches from left to right before the fire drinking toasts and feasting with their wheel alongside to potter with when they are so disposed,
and we can make all the others happy in the same fashion, so that thus the entire city may be happy.
But urge us not to this,
since, if we yield, the farmer will not be a farmer nor the potter a potter, nor will any other of the types that constitute state keep its form.
However, for the others it matters less.
For cobblers who deteriorate and are spoiled and pretend to be the workmen that they are not are no great danger to a state.
But guardians of laws and of the city who are not what they pretend to be, but only seem, destroy utterly, I would have you note, the entire state,
and on the other hand, they alone are decisive of its good government and happiness.
If then we are forming true guardians and keepers of our liberties, men least likely to harm the commonwealth,
but the proponent of the other ideal is thinking of farmers and 'happy' feasters as it were in a festival and not in a civic community,
he would have something else in mind than a state.
Consider, then, whether our aim in establishing the guardians is the greatest possible happiness among them or whether that is something we must look to see develop in the city as a whole,
but these helpers and guardians are to be constrained and persuaded to do what will make them the best craftsmen in their own work, and similarly all the rest.
And so, as the entire city develops and is ordered well, each class is to be left, to the share of happiness that its nature comports.
"Well," he said, "I think you are right."
"And will you then," I said, "also think me reasonable in another point akin to this?"
"What pray?"
"Consider whether these are the causes that corrupt other craftsmen too so as positively to spoil them."
"What causes?"
"Wealth and poverty," said I.
"How so?"
"Thus!
do you think a potter who grew rich would any longer be willing to give his mind to his craft?"
"By no means,"
said he.
"But will he become more idle and negligent than he was?"
"Far more."
"Then he becomes a worse potter?"
"Far worse too."
"And yet again, if from poverty he is unable to provide himself with tools and other requirements of his art, the work that he turns out will be worse, and he will also make inferior workmen of his sons or any others whom he teaches."
"Of course."
"From both causes, then, poverty and wealth, the products of the arts deteriorate, and so do the artisans?"
"So it appears."
"Here, then, is a second group of things it seems that our guardians must guard against and do all in their power to keep from slipping into the city without their knowledge."
"What are they?"
"Wealth and poverty," said I, "since the one brings luxury, idleness and innovation, and the other illiberality and the evil of bad workmanship in addition to innovation."
"Assuredly,"
he said;
"yet here is a point for your consideration, Socrates, how our city, possessing no wealth, will be able to wage war, especially if compelled to fight a large and wealthy state."
"Obviously," said I, "it would be rather difficult to fight one such, but easier to fight two."
"What did you mean by that?"
he said.
"Tell me first," I said, "whether, if they have to fight, they will not be fighting as athletes of war against men of wealth?"
"Yes, that is true,"
he said.
"Answer me then, Adeimantus.
Do you not think that one boxer perfectly trained in the art could easily fight two fat rich men who knew nothing of it?"
"Not at the same time perhaps," said he.
"Not even," said I, "if he were allowed to retreat and then turn and strike the one who came up first, and if he repeated the procedure many times under a burning and stifling sun?
Would not such a fighter down even a number of such opponents?"
"Doubtless," he said; "it wouldn't be surprising if he did."
"Well, don't you think that the rich have more of the skill and practice of boxing than of the art of war?"
"I do,"
he said.
"It will be easy, then, for our athletes in all probability to fight with double and triple their number."
"I shall have to concede the point," he said,
"for I believe you are right."
"Well then, if they send an embassy to the other city and say what is in fact true: 'We make no use of gold and silver nor is it lawful for us but it is for you: do you then join us in the war and keep the spoils of the enemy,' do you suppose any who heard such a proposal would choose to fight against hard and wiry hounds rather than with the aid of the hounds against fat and tender sheep?"
"I think not."
"Yet consider whether the accumulation of all the wealth of other cities in one does not involve danger for the state that has no wealth."
"What happy innocence," said I, "to suppose that you can properly use the name city of any other than the one we are constructing."
"Why, what should we say?"
he said.
"A greater predication," said I, "must be applied to the others.
For they are each one of them many cities, not a city, as it goes in the game.
There are two at the least at enmity with one another, the city of the rich and the city of the poor,
and in each of these there are many.
If you deal with them as one you will altogether miss the mark, but if you treat them as a multiplicity by offering to the one faction the property, the power, the very persons of the other, you will continue always to have few enemies and many allies.
And so long as your city is governed soberly in the order just laid down, it will be the greatest of cities.
I do not mean greatest in repute, but in reality, even though it have only a thousand defenders.
For a city of this size that is really one you will not easily discover either among Greeks or barbarians but of those that seem so you will find many and many times the size of this. Or do you think otherwise?"
"No, indeed I don't,"
said he.
"Would not this, then, be the best rule and measure for our governors of the proper size of the city and of the territory that they should mark off for a city of that size and seek no more?"
"What is the measure?"
"I think," said I, "that they should let it grow so long as in its growth it consents to remain a unity, but no further."
"Excellent,"
he said.
"Then is not this still another injunction that we should lay upon our guardians, to keep guard in every way that the city shall not be too small, nor great only in seeming, but that it shall be a sufficient city and one?"
"That behest will perhaps be an easy one for them," he said.
"And still easier, haply," I said, "is this that we mentioned before when we said that if a degenerate offspring was born to the guardians he must be sent away to the other classes, and likewise if a superior to the others he must be enrolled among the guardians;
and the purport of all this was that the other citizens too must be sent to the task for which their natures were fitted, one man to one work, in order that each of them fulfilling his own function may be not many men, but one, and so the entire city may come to be not a multiplicity but a unity."
"Why yes," he said, "this is even more trifling than that."
"These are not, my good Adeimantus, as one might suppose, numerous and difficult injunctions that we are imposing upon them, but they are all easy, provided they guard, as the saying is, the one great thing or instead of great let us call it sufficient."
"What is that?"
he said.
"Their education and nurture," I replied.
"For if a right education makes of them reasonable men they will easily discover everything of this kind and other principles that we now pass over, as that the possession of wives and marriage, and the procreation of children and all that sort of thing should be made as far as possible the proverbial goods of friends that are common."
"Yes, that would be the best way," he said.
"And, moreover," said I, "the state, if it once starts well, proceeds as it were in a cycle of growth.
I mean that a sound nurture and education if kept up creates good natures in the state, and sound natures in turn receiving an education of this sort develop into better men than their predecessors both for other purposes and for the production of offspring as among animals also."
"It is probable,"
he said.
"To put it briefly, then," said I, "it is to this that the overseers of our state must cleave and be watchful against its insensible corruption.
They must throughout be watchful against innovations in music and gymnastics counter to the established order, and to the best of their power guard against them, fearing when anyone says that
"That song is most regarded among men which hovers newest on the singer's lips."
lest haply it be supposed that the poet means not new songs but a new way of song and is commending this.
But we must not praise that sort of thing nor conceive it to be the poet's meaning.
For a change to a new type of music is something to beware of as a hazard of all our fortunes.
For the modes of music are never disturbed without unsettling of the most fundamental political and social conventions, as Damon affirms and as I am convinced."
"Set me too down in the number of the convinced," said Adeimantus.
"It is here, then," I said, "in music, as it seems, that our guardians must build their guard-house and post of watch."
"It is certain," he said, "that this is the kind of lawlessness that easily insinuates itself unobserved."
"Yes," said I, "because it is supposed to be only a form of play and to work no harm."
"Nor does it work any," he said, "except that by gradual infiltration it softly overflows upon the characters and pursuits of men and from these issues forth grown greater to attack their business dealings, and from these relations it proceeds against the laws and the constitution with wanton licence, Socrates, till finally it overthrows all things public and private."
"Well," said I, "are these things so?"
"I think so," he said.
"Then, as we were saying in the beginning, our youth must join in a more law-abiding play, since, if play grows lawless and the children likewise, it is impossible that they should grow up to be men of serious temper and lawful spirit."
"Of course,"
he said.
"And so we may reason that when children in their earliest play are imbued with the spirit of law and order through their music, the opposite of the former supposition happens this spirit waits upon them in all things and fosters their growth, and restores and sets up again whatever was overthrown in the other type of state."
"True, indeed,"
he said.
"Then such men rediscover for themselves those seemingly trifling conventions which their predecessors abolished altogether."
"Of what sort?"
"Such things as the becoming silence of the young in the presence of their elders; the giving place to them and rising up before them, and dutiful service of parents, and the cut of the hair and the garments and the fashion of the foot-gear, and in general the deportment of the body and everything of the kind. Don't you think so?"
"I do."
"Yet to enact them into laws would, I think, be silly.
For such laws are not obeyed nor would they last, being enacted only in words and on paper."
"How could they?"
"At any rate, Adeimantus," I said, "the direction of the education from whence one starts is likely to determine the quality of what follows.
Does not like ever summon like?"
"Surely."
"And the final outcome, I presume, we would say is one complete and vigorous product of good or the reverse."
"Of course,"
said he.
"For my part, then," I said, "for these reasons I would not go on to try to legislate on such matters."
"With good reason,"
said he.
"But what, in heaven's name," said I, "about business matters, the deals that men make with one another in the agora
and, if you please, contracts with workmen and actions for foul language and assault, the filing of declarations, the impanelling of juries, the payment and exaction of any dues that may be needful in markets or harbors and in general market, police or harbor regulations and the like, can we bring ourselves to legislate about these?"
"Nay, 'twould not be fitting," he said, "to dictate to good and honorable men.
For most of the enactments that are needed about these things they will easily, I presume, discover."
"Yes, my friend, provided God grants them the preservation of the principles of law that we have already discussed."
"Failing that," said he, "they will pass their lives multiplying such petty laws and amending them in the expectation of attaining what is best."
"You mean," said I, "that the life of such citizens will resemble that of men who are sick, yet from intemperance are unwilling to abandon their unwholesome regimen."
"By all means."
And truly," said I, "these latter go on in a most charming fashion.
For with all their doctoring they accomplish nothing except to complicate and augment their maladies.
And they are always hoping that some one will recommend a panacea that will restore their health."
"A perfect description," he said, "of the state of such invalids."
"And isn't this a charming trait in them, that they hate most in all the world him who tells them the truth that until a man stops drinking and gorging and wenching and idling, neither drugs nor cautery nor the knife, no, nor spells nor periapts will be of any avail?"
"Not altogether charming," he said, "for there is no grace or charm in being angry with him who speaks well."
"You do not seem to be an admirer of such people," said I.
"No, by heaven, I am not."
"Neither then, if an entire city, as we were just now saying, acts in this way, will it have your approval,
or don't you think that the way of such invalids is precisely that of those cities which being badly governed forewarn their citizens not to meddle with the general constitution of the state, denouncing death to whosoever attempts that
while whoever most agreeably serves them governed as they are and who curries favor with them by fawning upon them and anticipating their desires and by his cleverness in gratifying them, him they will account the good man, the man wise in worthwhile things, the man they will delight to honor?"
"Yes," he said, "I think their conduct is identical, and I don't approve it in the very least."
"And what again of those who are willing and eager to serve such states?
Don't you admire their valiance and light-hearted irresponsibility?"
"I do," he said, "except those who are actually deluded and suppose themselves to be in truth statesmen because they are praised by the many."
"What do you mean?
"Can't you make allowances for the men?
Do you think it possible for a man who does not know how to measure when a multitude of others equally ignorant assure him that he is four cubits tall not to suppose this to be the fact about himself?"
"Why no," he said, "I don't think that."
"Then don't be harsh with them.
For surely such fellows are the most charming spectacle in the world when they enact and amend such laws as we just now described and are perpetually expecting to find a way of putting an end to frauds in business and in the other matters of which I was speaking
because they can't see that they are in very truth trying to cut off a Hydra's head."
"Indeed," he said, "that is exactly what they are doing."
"I, then," said I, "should not have supposed that the true lawgiver ought to work out matters of that kind in the laws and the constitution either of an ill-governed or a well-governed state
in the one because they are useless and accomplish nothing,
in the other because some of them anybody could discover and others will result spontaneously from the pursuits already described."
"What part of legislation, then," he said, "is still left for us?"
And I replied, "For us nothing, but for the Apollo of Delphi, the chief, the fairest and the first of enactments."
"What are they?"
he said.
"The founding of temples, and sacrifices, and other forms of worship of gods, daemons, and heroes;
and likewise the burial of the dead and the services we must render to the dwellers in the world beyond to keep them gracious.
For of such matters we neither know anything nor in the founding of our city if we are wise shall we entrust them to any other or make use of any other interpreter than the God of our fathers.
For this God surely is in such matters for all mankind the interpreter of the religion of their fathers who from his seat in the middle and at the very navel of the earth delivers his interpretation."
"Excellently said," he replied; "and that is what we must do."
"At last, then, son of Ariston," said I, "your city may be considered as established.
The next thing is to procure a sufficient light somewhere and to look yourself,
and call in the aid of your brother and of Polemarchus and the rest,
if we may in any wise discover where justice and injustice should be in it, wherein they differ from one another and which of the two he must have who is to be happy, alike whether his condition is known or not known to all gods and men."
"Nonsense," said Glaucon, "you promised that you would carry on the search yourself, admitting that it would be impious for you not to come to the aid of justice by every means in your power."
"A true reminder," I said, "and I must do so, but you also must lend a hand."
"Well," he said, "we will."
"I expect then," said I, "that we shall find it in this way.
I think our city, if it has been rightly founded is good in the full sense of the word."
"Necessarily,"
he said.
"Clearly, then, it will be wise, brave, sober, and just."
"Clearly."
"Then if we find any of these qualities in it, the remainder will be that which we have not found?"
"Surely."
"Take the case of any four other things.
If we were looking for any one of them in anything and recognized the object of our search first,
that would have been enough for us,
but if we had recognized the other three first, that in itself would have made known to us the thing we were seeking.
For plainly there was nothing left for it to be but the remainder."
"Right," he said.
"And so, since these are four, we must conduct the search in the same way."
"Clearly."
"And, moreover, the first thing that I think I clearly see therein is the wisdom, and there is something odd about that, it appears."
"What?"
said he.
"Wise in very deed I think the city that we have described is, for it is well counselled, is it not?"
"Yes."
"And surely this very thing, good counsel, is a form of wisdom.
For it is not by ignorance but by knowledge that men counsel well."
"Obviously."
"But there are many and manifold knowledges or sciences in the city."
"Of course."
"Is it then owing to the science of her carpenters that a city is to be called wise and well advised?"
"By no means for that, but rather mistress of the arts of building."
"Then a city is not to be styled wise because of the deliberations of the science of wooden utensils for their best production?"
"No, I grant you."
"Is it, then, because of that of brass implements or any other of that kind?"
"None whatsoever,"
he said.
"Nor yet because of the science of the production of crops from the soil, but the name it takes from that is agricultural."
"I think so."
"Then," said I, "is there any science in the city just founded by us residing in any of its citizens which does not take counsel about some particular thing in the city but about the city as a whole and the betterment of its relations with itself and other states?"
"Why, there is."
"What is it," said I, "and in whom is it found?"
"It is the science of guardianship or government and it is to be found in those rulers to whom we just now gave the name of guardians in the full sense of the word."
"And what term then do you apply to the city because of this knowledge?"
"Well advised," he said, "and truly wise."
"Which class, then," said I, "do you suppose will be the more numerous in our city, the smiths or these true guardians?"
"The smiths, by far," he said.
"And would not these rulers be the smallest of all the groups of those who possess special knowledge and receive distinctive appellations?"
"By far."
"Then it is by virtue of its smallest class and minutest part of itself, and the wisdom that resides therein, in the part which takes the lead and rules, that a city established on principles of nature would be wise as a whole.
And as it appears these are by nature the fewest, the class to which it pertains to partake of the knowledge which alone of all forms of knowledge deserves the name of wisdom."
"Most true," he said.
"This one of our four, then, we have, I know not how, discovered, the thing itself and its place in the state."
"I certainly think," said he, "that it has been discovered sufficiently."
"But again there is no difficulty in seeing bravery itself and the part of the city in which it resides for which the city is called brave."
"How so?"
"Who," said I, "in calling a city cowardly or brave would fix his eyes on any other part of it than that which defends it and wages war in its behalf?"
"No one at all," he said.
"For the reason, I take it," said I, "that the cowardice or the bravery of the other inhabitants does not determine for it the one quality or the other."
"It does not."
"Bravery too, then, belongs to a city by virtue of a part of itself owing to its possession in that part of a quality that under all conditions will preserve the conviction that things to be feared are precisely those which and such as the lawgiver inculcated in their education.
Is not that what you call bravery?"
"I don't altogether understand what you said," he replied; "but say it again."
"A kind of conservation," I said, "is what I mean by bravery."
"What sort of a conservation?"
"The conservation of the conviction which the law has created by education about fearful things what and what sort of things are to be feared.
And by the phrase 'under all conditions' I mean that the brave man preserves it both in pain and pleasures and in desires and fears and does not expel it from his soul.
And I may illustrate it by a similitude if you please."
"I do."
"You are aware that dyers when they wish to dye wool so as to hold the purple hue begin by selecting from the many colors there be the one nature of the white and then give it a careful preparatory treatment so that it will take the hue in the best way, and after the treatment, then and then only, dip it in the dye.
And things that are dyed by this process become fast-colored and washing either with or without lyes cannot take away the sheen of their hues.
But otherwise you know what happens to them, whether anyone dips other colors or even these without the preparatory treatment."
"I know," he said, "that they present a ridiculous and washed-out appearance."
"By this analogy, then," said I, "you must conceive what we too to the best of our ability were doing when we selected our soldiers and educated them in music and exercises of the body.
The sole aim of our contrivance was that they should be convinced and receive our laws like a dye as it were, so that their belief and faith might be fast-colored both about the things that are to be feared and all other things because of the fitness of their nature and nurture,
and that so their dyes might not be washed out by those lyes that have such dread power to scour our faiths away, pleasure more potent than any detergent or abstergent to accomplish this, and pain and fear and desire more sure than any lye.
This power in the soul, then, this unfailing conservation of right and lawful belief about things to be and not to be feared is what I call and would assume to be courage, unless you have something different to say."
"No, nothing," said he; "for I presume that you consider mere right opinion about the same matters not produced by education, that which may manifest itself in a beast or a slave, to have little or nothing to do with law and that you would call it by another name than courage."
"That is most true," said I.
"Well then," he said, "I accept this as bravery."
"Do so," said I, "and you will be right with the reservation that it is the courage of a citizen.
Some other time, if it please you, we will discuss it more fully.
At present we were not seeking this but justice;
and for the purpose of that inquiry I believe we have done enough."
"You are quite right," he said.
"Two things still remain," said I, "to make out in our city, soberness and the object of the whole inquiry, justice."
"Quite so."
"If there were only some way to discover justice so that we need not further concern ourselves about soberness."
"Well, I, for my part," he said, "neither know of any such way nor would I wish justice to be discovered first if that means that we are not to go on to the consideration of soberness.
But if you desire to please me, consider this before that. It would certainly be very wrong of me not to desire it," said I.
"Go on with the inquiry then," he said.
"I must go on," I replied, "and viewed from here it bears more likeness to a kind of concord and harmony than the other virtues did."
"How so?"
"Soberness is a kind of beautiful order and a continence of certain pleasures and appetites, as they say, using the phrase 'master of himself' I know not how;
and there are other similar expressions that as it were point us to the same trail. Is that not so?"
"Most certainly."
"Now the phrase 'master of himself' is an absurdity, is it not?
For he who is master of himself would also be subject to himself, and he who is subject to himself would be master.
For the same person is spoken of in all these expressions."
"Of course."
"But," said I, "the intended meaning of this way of speaking appears to me to be that the soul of a man within him has a better part and a worse part,
and the expression self-mastery means the control of the worse by the naturally better part.
It is, at any rate, a term of praise.
But when, because of bad breeding or some association, the better part, which is the smaller, is dominated by the multitude of the worse,
I think that our speech censures this as a reproach, and calls the man in this plight unselfcontrolled and licentious."
"That seems likely," he said.
"Turn your eyes now upon our new city," said I, "and you will find one of these conditions existent in it.
For you will say that it is justly spoken of as master of itself if that in which the superior rules the inferior is to be called sober and self-mastered."
"I do turn my eyes upon it," he said, "and it is as you say."
"And again, the mob of motley appetites and pleasures and pains one would find chiefly in children and women and slaves and in the base rabble of those who are freemen in name."
"By all means."
"But the simple and moderate appetites which with the aid of reason and right opinion are guided by consideration you will find in few and those the best born and best educated."
"True,"
he said.
"And do you not find this too in your city and a domination there of the desires in the multitude and the rabble by the desires and the wisdom that dwell in the minority of the better?"
"I do,"
he said.
"If, then, there is any city that deserves to be described as master of its pleasures and desires and self-mastered, this one merits that designation."
"Most assuredly,"
he said.
"And is it not also to be called sober in all these respects?"
"Indeed it is,"
he said.
"And yet again, if there is any city in which the rulers and the ruled are of one mind as to who ought to rule, that condition will be found in this. Don't you think so?"
"I most emphatically do," he said.
"In which class of the citizens, then, will you say that the virtue of soberness has its seat when this is their condition?
In the rulers or in the ruled?"
"In both, I suppose,"
he said.
"Do you see then," said I, "that our intuition was not a bad one just now that discerned a likeness between soberness and a kind of harmony?"
"Why so?"
"Because its operation is unlike that of courage and wisdom, which residing in separate parts respectively made the city, the one wise and the other brave.
That is not the way of soberness, but it extends literally through the entire gamut throughout, bringing about the unison in the same chant of the strongest, the weakest and the intermediate, whether in wisdom or, if you please, in strength, or for that matter in numbers, wealth, or any similar criterion.
So that we should be quite right in affirming this unanimity to be soberness, the concord of the naturally superior and inferior as to which ought to rule both in the state and the individual."
"I entirely concur," he said.
"Very well," said I.
"We have made out these three forms in our city to the best of our present judgement.
What can be the remaining form that would give the city still another virtue?
For it is obvious that the remainder is justice."
"Obvious."
"Now then, Glaucon, is the time for us like huntsmen to surround the covert and keep close watch that justice may not slip through and get away from us and vanish from our sight.
It plainly must be somewhere hereabouts.
Keep your eyes open then and do your best to descry it.
You may see it before I do and point it out to me."
"Would that I could," he said;
"but I think rather that if you find in me one who can follow you and discern what you point out to him you will be making a very fair use of me."
"Pray for success then," said I, "and follow along with me."
"That I will do, only lead on," he said.
"And truly," said I, "it appears to be an inaccessible place, lying in deep shadows."
"It certainly is a dark covert, not easy to beat up."
"But all the same on we must go."
"Yes, on."
And I caught view and gave a hello and said, "Glaucon, I think we have found its trail and I don't believe it will get away from us."
"I am glad to hear that,"
said he.
"Truly," said I, "we were slackers indeed."
"How so?"
"Why, all the time, blessed one, the thing apparently was tumbling about our feet from the start and yet we couldn't see it, but were most ludicrous,
like people who sometimes hunt for what they hold in their hands.
So we did not turn our eyes upon it, but looked off into the distance, which perhaps was the reason it escaped us."
"What do you mean?" he said.
"This," I replied, "that it seems to me that though we were speaking of it and hearing about it all the time we did not understand ourselves or realize that we were speaking of it in a sense."
"That is a tedious prologue," he said, "for an eager listener."
"Listen then," said I, "and learn if there is anything in what I say.
For what we laid down in the beginning as a universal requirement when we were founding our city, this I think, or some form of this, is justice.
And what we did lay down, and often said, you recall, was that each one man must perform one social service in the state for which his nature is best adapted."
"Yes, we said that."
"And again that to do one's own business and not to be a busybody is justice, is a saying that we have heard from many and have often repeated ourselves."
"We have."
"This, then," I said, "my friend, if taken in a certain sense appears to be justice, this principle of doing one's own business.
Do you know whence I infer this?"
"No, but tell me," he said.
"I think that this is the remaining virtue in the state after our consideration of soberness, courage, and intelligence, a quality which made it possible for them all to grow up in the body politic and which when they have sprung up preserves them as long as it is present.
And I hardly need to remind you that we said that justice would be the residue after we had found the other three."
"That is an unavoidable conclusion," he said.
"But moreover," said I, "if we were required to decide what it is whose indwelling presence will contribute most to making our city good,
it would be a difficult decision whether it was the unanimity of rulers and ruled
or the conservation in the minds of the soldiers of the convictions produced by law as to what things are or are not to be feared,
or the watchful intelligence that resides in the guardians,
or whether this is the chief cause of its goodness, the principle embodied in child, woman, slave, free, artisan, ruler, and ruled, that each performed his one task as one man and was not a versatile busybody."
"Hard to decide indeed," he said.
"A thing, then, that in its contribution to the excellence of a state vies with and rivals its wisdom, its soberness, its bravery, is this principle of everyone in it doing his own task."
"It is indeed,"
he said.
"And is not justice the name you would have to give to the principle that rivals these as conducing to the virtue of state?"
"By all means."
"Consider it in this wise too if so you will be convinced.
Will you not assign the conduct of lawsuits in your state to the rulers?"
"Of course."
"Will not this be the chief aim of their decisions, that no one shall have what belongs to others or be deprived of his own?
Nothing else but this."
"On the assumption that this is just?"
"Yes."
"From this point of view too, then, the having and doing of one's own and what belongs to oneself would admittedly be justice."
"That is so."
"Consider now whether you agree with me.
A carpenter undertaking to do the work of a cobbler or a cobbler of a carpenter or their interchange of one another's tools or honors or even the attempt of the same man to do both
the confounding of all other functions would not, think you, greatly injure a state, would it?"
"Not much,"
he said.
"But when I fancy one who is by nature an artisan or some kind of money-maker tempted and incited by wealth or command of votes or bodily strength or some similar advantage tries to enter into the class of the soldiers or one of the soldiers into the class of counsellors and guardians, for which he is not fitted,
and these interchange their tools and their honors or when the same man undertakes all these functions at once,
then, I take it, you too believe that this kind of substitution and meddlesomeness is the ruin of a state."
"By all means."
"The interference with one another's business, then, of three existent classes and the substitution of the one for the other is the greatest injury to a state and would most rightly be designated as the thing which chiefly works it harm."
"Precisely so."
"And the thing that works the greatest harm to one's own state, will you not pronounce to be injustice?"
"Of course."
"This, then, is injustice."
"Again, let us put it in this way.
The proper functioning of the money-making class, the helpers and the guardians, each doing its own work in the state, being the reverse of that just described, would be justice and would render the city just."
"I think the case is thus and no otherwise," said he.
"Let us not yet affirm it quite fixedly," I said, "but if this form when applied to the individual man, accepted there also as a definition of justice, we will then concede the point
for what else will there be to say?
But if not, then we will look for something else.
But now let us work out the inquiry in which we supposed that, if we found some larger thing that contained justice and viewed it there, we should more easily discover its nature in the individual man.
And we agreed that this larger thing is the city, and so we constructed the best city in our power, well knowing that in the good city it would of course be found.
What, then, we thought we saw there we must refer back to the individual and, if it is confirmed, all will be well.
But if something different manifests itself in the individual, we will return again to the state and test it there and it may be that, by examining them side by side and rubbing them against one another, as it were from the fire-sticks we may cause the spark of justice to flash forth,
and when it is thus revealed confirm it in our own minds."
"Well," he said, "that seems a sound method and that is what we must do."
"Then," said I, "if you call a thing by the same name whether it is big or little, is it unlike in the way in which it is called the same or like?"
"Like,"
he said.
"Then a just man too will not differ at all from a just city in respect of the very form of justice, but will be like it."
"Yes, like."
"But now the city was thought to be just because three natural kinds existing in it performed each its own function, and again it was sober, brave, and wise because of certain other affections and habits of these three kinds."
"True,"
he said.
"Then, my friend, we shall thus expect the individual also to have these same forms in his soul, and by reason of identical affections of these with those in the city to receive properly the same appellations."
"Inevitable,"
he said.
"Goodness gracious," said I, "here is another trifling inquiry into which we have plunged, the question whether the soul really contains these three forms in itself or not."
"It does not seem to me at all trifling," he said, "for perhaps, Socrates, the saying is true that 'fine things are difficult.'"
"Apparently," said I;
"and let me tell you, Glaucon, that in my opinion we shall never in the world apprehend this matter from such methods as we are now employing in discussion.
For there is another longer and harder way that conducts to this.
Yet we may perhaps discuss it on the level of previous statements and inquiries."
"May we acquiesce in that?"
he said.
"I for my part should be quite satisfied with that for the present."
"And I surely should be more than satisfied," I replied.
"Don't you weary then," he said, "but go on with the inquiry."
"Is it not, then," said I, "impossible for us to avoid admitting this much, that the same forms and qualities are to be found in each one of us that are in the state?
They could not get there from any other source.
It would be absurd to suppose that the element of high spirit was not derived in states from the private citizens who are reputed to have this quality as the populations of the Thracian and Scythian lands and generally of northern regions; or the quality of love of knowledge, which would chiefly be attributed to the region where we dwell, or the love of money which we might say is not least likely to be found in Phoenicians and the population of Egypt."
"One certainly might,"
he replied.
"This is the fact then," said I, "and there is no difficulty in recognizing it."
"Certainly not."
"But the matter begins to be difficult when you ask whether we do all these things with the same thing or whether there are three things and we do one thing with one and one with another
learn with one part of ourselves, feel anger with another, and with yet a third desire the pleasures of nutrition and generation and their kind,
or whether it is with the entire soul that we function in each case when we once begin.
That is what is really hard to determine properly."
"I think so too,"
he said.
"Let us then attempt to define the boundary and decide whether they are identical with one another in this way."
"How?"
"It is obvious that the same thing will never do or suffer opposites in the same respect in relation to the same thing and at the same time.
So that if ever we find these contradictions in the functions of the mind we shall know that it was not the same thing functioning but a plurality."
"Very well."
"Consider, then, what I am saying."
"Say on,"
he replied.
"Is it possible for the same thing at the same time in the same respect to be at rest and in motion?"
"By no means."
"Let us have our understanding still more precise, lest as we proceed we become involved in dispute.
If anyone should say of a man standing still but moving his hands and head that the same man is at the same time at rest and in motion we should not, I take it, regard that as the right way of expressing it,
but rather that a part of him is at rest and a part in motion. Is not that so?"
"It is."
"Then if the disputant should carry the jest still further with the subtlety that tops at any rate stand still as a whole at the same time that they are in motion when with the peg fixed in one point they revolve,
and that the same is true of any other case of circular motion about the same spot
we should reject the statement on the ground that the repose and the movement in such cases were not in relation to the same parts of the objects,
but we would say that there was a straight line and a circumference in them and that in respect of the straight line they are standing still
since they do not incline to either side,
but in respect of the circumference they move in a circle;
but that when as they revolve they incline the perpendicular to right or left or forward or back, then they are in no wise at rest."
"And that would be right,"
he said.
"No such remarks then will disconcert us or any whit the more make us believe that it is ever possible for the same thing at the same time in the same respect and the same relation to suffer, be, or do opposites."
"They will not me, I am sure,"
said he.
"All the same, said I, "that we may not be forced to examine at tedious length the entire list of such contentions and convince ourselves that they are false, let us proceed on the hypothesis that this is so, with the understanding that, if it ever appear otherwise, everything that results from the assumption shall be invalidated."
"That is what we must do," he said.
"Will you not then," said I, "set down as opposed to one another assent and dissent, and the endeavor after a thing to the rejection of it, and embracing to repelling
do not these and all things like these belong to the class of opposite actions or passions; it will make no difference which?"
"None," said he, "but they are opposites."
"What then," said I, "of thirst and hunger and the appetites generally, and again consenting and willing, would you not put them all somewhere in the classes just described?
Will you not say, for example, that the soul of one who desires either strives for that which he desires or draws towards its embrace what it wishes to accrue to it;
or again, in so far as it wills that anything be presented to it, nods assent to itself thereon as if someone put the question, striving towards its attainment?"
"I would say so."
"But what of not-willing and not consenting nor yet desiring, shall we not put these under the soul's rejection and repulsion from itself and generally into the opposite class from all the former?"
"Of course."
"This being so, shall we say that the desires constitute a class and that the most conspicuous members of that class are what we call thirst and hunger?"
"We shall,"
said he.
"Is not the one desire of drink, the other of food?"
"Yes."
"Then in so far as it is thirst, would it be of anything more than that of which we say it is a desire in the soul?
I mean is thirst thirst for hot drink or cold or much or little or in a word for a draught of any particular quality,
or is it the fact that if heat is attached to the thirst it would further render the desire a desire of cold, and if cold of hot?
But if owing to the presence of muchness the thirst is much it would render it a thirst for much and if little for little.
But mere thirst will never be desire of anything else than that of which it is its nature to be, mere drink, and so hunger of food."
"That is so," he said; "each desire in itself is of that thing only of which it is its nature to be. The epithets belong to the quality such or such."
"Let no one then," said I, "disconcert us when off our guard with the objection that everybody desires not drink but good drink and not food but good food,
because (the argument will run) all men desire good,
and so, if thirst is desire, it would be of good drink or of good whatsoever it is; and so similarly of other desires."
"Why," he said, "there perhaps would seem to be something in that objection."
"But I need hardly remind you," said I, "that of relative terms those that are somehow qualified are related to a qualified correlate, those that are severally just themselves to a correlate that is just itself."
"I don't understand," he said.
"Don't you understand," said I, "that the greater is such as to be greater than something?"
"Certainly."
"Is it not than the less?"
"Yes."
"But the much greater than the much less. Is that not so?"
"Yes."
"And may we add the one time greater than the one time less and that which will be greater than that which will be less?"
"Surely."
"And similarly of the more towards the fewer, and the double towards the half and of all like cases, and again of the heavier towards the lighter, the swifter towards the slower, and yet again of the hot towards the cold and all cases of that kind, does not the same hold?"
"By all means."
"But what of the sciences?
Is not the way of it the same?
Science which is just that, is of knowledge which is just that, or is of whatsoever we must assume the correlate of science to be.
But a particular science of a particular kind is of some particular thing of a particular kind.
I mean something like this:
As there was a science of making a house it differed from other sciences so as to be named architecture."
"Certainly."
"Was not this by reason of its being of a certain kind such as no other of all the rest?"
"Yes."
"And was it not because it was of something of a certain kind that it itself became a certain kind of science?
And similarly of the other arts and sciences?"
"That is so.
"This then," said I, "if haply you now understand, is what you must say I then meant, by the statement that of all things that are such as to be of something those that are just themselves only are of things just themselves only, but things of a certain kind are of things of a kind.
And I don't at all mean that they are of the same kind as the things of which they are,
so that we are to suppose that the science of health and disease is a healthy and diseased science and that of evil and good, evil and good.
I only mean that as science became the science not of just the thing of which science is but of some particular kind of thing, namely, of health and disease,
the result was that it itself became some kind of science and this caused it to be no longer called simply science but with the addition of the particular kind, medical science."
"I understand," he said, "and agree that it is so."
"To return to thirst, then," said I, "will you not class it with the things that are of something and say that it is what it is in relation to something
and it is, I presume, thirst?"
"I will," said he, " namely of drink."
"Then if the drink is of a certain kind, so is the thirst, but thirst that is just thirst is neither of much nor little nor good nor bad, nor in a word of any kind, but just thirst is naturally of just drink only."
"By all means."
"The soul of the thirsty then, in so far as it thirsts, wishes nothing else than to drink, and yearns for this and its impulse is towards this."
"Obviously."
"Then if anything draws it back when thirsty it must be something different in it from that which thirsts and drives it like a beast to drink.
For it cannot be, we say, that the same thing with the same part of itself at the same time acts in opposite ways about the same thing."
"We must admit that it does not."
"So I fancy it is not well said of the archer that his hands at the same time thrust away the bow and draw it nigh, but we should rather say that there is one hand that puts it away and another that draws it to."
"By all means,"
he said.
"Are we to say, then, that some men sometimes though thirsty refuse to drink?"
"We are indeed," he said, "many and often."
"What then," said I, "should one affirm about them?"
"Is it not that there is something in the soul that bids them drink and a something that forbids, a different something that masters that which bids?"
"I think so."
"And is it not the fact that that which inhibits such actions arises when it arises from the calculations of reason, but the impulses which draw and drag come through affections and diseases?"
"Apparently."
"Not unreasonably," said I, "shall we claim that they are two and different from one another, naming that in the soul whereby it reckons and reasons the rational and that with which it loves, hungers, thirsts, and feels the flutter and titillation of other desires, the irrational and appetitive companion of various repletions and pleasures."
"It would not be unreasonable but quite natural," he said, "for us to think this."
"These two forms, then, let us assume to have been marked off as actually existing in the soul.
But now the Thumos or principle of high spirit, that with which we feel anger, is it a third, or would it be identical in nature with one of these?"
"Perhaps," he said, "with one of these, the appetitive."
"But," I said, "I once heard a story which I believe, that Leontius the son of Aglaion, on his way up from the Peiraeus under the outer side of the northern wall, becoming aware of dead bodies that lay at the place of public execution at the same time felt a desire to see them and a repugnance and aversion,
and that for a time he resisted and veiled his head, but overpowered in despite of all by his desire, with wide staring eyes he rushed up to the corpses and cried, 'There, ye wretches, take your fill of the fine spectacle!'"
"I too," he said, "have heard the story."
"Yet, surely, this anecdote," I said, "signifies that the principle of anger sometimes fights against desires as an alien thing against an alien."
"Yes, it does,"
he said.
"And do we not," said I, "on many other occasions observe when his desires constrain a man contrary to his reason that he reviles himself and is angry with that within which masters him and that as it were in a faction of two parties the high spirit of such a man becomes the ally of his reason?
But its making common cause with the desires against the reason when reason whispers low'Thou must not' that, I think, is a kind of thing you would not affirm ever to have perceived in yourself, nor, I fancy, in anybody else either."
"No, by heaven,"
he said.
"Again, when a man thinks himself to be in the wrong,
is it not true that the nobler he is the less is he capable of anger though suffering hunger and cold and whatsoever else at the hands of him whom he believes to be acting justly therein,
and as I say his spirit refuses to be aroused against such a one?"
"True,"
he said.
"But what when a man believes himself to be wronged,
does not his spirit in that case seethe and grow fierce (and also because of his suffering hunger, cold and the like) and make itself the ally of what he judges just, and in noble souls it endures and wins the victory and will not let go until either it achieves its purpose, or death ends all, or, as a dog is called back by a shepherd, it is called back by the reason within and calmed."
"Your similitude is perfect," he said, "and it confirms our former statements that the helpers are as it were dogs subject to the rulers who are as it were the shepherds of the city."
"You apprehend my meaning excellently," said I.
"But do you also take note of this?"
"Of what?"
"That what we now think about the spirited element is just the opposite of our recent surmise.
For then we supposed it to be a part of the appetitive, but now, far from that, we say that, in the factions of the soul, it much rather marshals itself on the side of the reason."
"By all means,"
he said.
"Is it then distinct from this too, or is it a form of the rational, so that there are not three but two kinds in the soul, the rational and the appetitive,
or just as in the city there were three existing kinds that composed its structure, the moneymakers, the helpers, the counsellors, so also in the soul there exists a third kind, this principle of high spirit, which is the helper of reason by nature unless it is corrupted by evil nurture?"
"We have to assume it as a third," he said.
"Yes," said I, "provided it shall have been shown to be something different from the rational, as it has been shown to be other than the appetitive."
"That is not hard to be shown," he said; "for that much one can see in children, that they are from their very birth chock-full of rage and high spirit, but as for reason, some of them, to my thinking, never participate in it, and the majority quite late."
"Yes, by heaven, excellently said," I replied;
"and further, one could see in animals that what you say is true.
And to these instances we may add the testimony of Homer quoted above:
"He smote his breast and chided thus his heart.
For there Homer has clearly represented that in us which has reflected about the better and the worse as rebuking that which feels unreasoning anger as if it were a distinct and different thing."
"You are entirely right," he said.
"Through these waters, then," said I, "we have with difficulty made our way and we are fairly agreed that the same kinds equal in number are to be found in the state and in the soul of each one of us."
"That is so."
"Then does not the necessity of our former postulate immediately follow, that as and whereby the state was wise so and thereby is the individual wise?"
"Surely."
"And so whereby and as the individual is brave, thereby and so is the state brave, and that both should have all the other constituents of virtue in the same way?"
"Necessarily."
"Just too, then, Glaucon, I presume we shall say a man is in the same way in which a city was just."
"That too is quite inevitable."
"But we surely cannot have forgotten this, that the state was just by reason of each of the three classes found in it fulfilling its own function."
"I don't think we have forgotten," he said.
"We must remember, then, that each of us also in whom the several parts within him perform each their own task he will be a just man and one who minds his own affair."
"We must indeed remember," he said.
"Does it not belong to the rational part to rule, being wise and exercising forethought in behalf of the entire soul, and to the principle of high spirit to be subject to this and its ally?"
"Assuredly."
"Then is it not, as we said, the blending of music and gymnastics that will render them concordant, intensifying and fostering the one with fair words and teachings and relaxing and soothing and making gentle the other by harmony and rhythm?"
"Quite so," said he.
"And these two thus reared and having learned and been educated to do their own work in the true sense of the phrase, will preside over the appetitive part which is the mass of the soul in each of us and the most insatiate by nature of wealth.
They will keep watch upon it, lest, by being filled and infected with the so-called pleasures associated with the body and so waxing big and strong, it may not keep to its own work but may undertake to enslave and rule over the classes which it is not fitting that it should, and so overturn the entire life of all."
"By all means," he said.
"Would not these two, then, best keep guard against enemies from without also in behalf of the entire soul and body, the one taking counsel, the other giving battle, attending upon the ruler, and by its courage executing the ruler's designs?"
"That is so."
"Brave, too, then, I take it, we call each individual by virtue of this part in him, when, namely, his high spirit preserves in the midst of pains and pleasures the rule handed down by the reason as to what is or is not to be feared."
"Right," he said.
"But wise by that small part that ruled in him and handed down these commands, by its possession in turn within it of the knowledge of what is beneficial for each and for the whole, the community composed of the three."
"By all means."
"And again, was he not sober by reason of the friendship and concord of these same parts, when, namely, the ruling principle and its two subjects are at one in the belief that the reason ought to rule, and do not raise faction against it?"
"The virtue of soberness certainly," said he, "is nothing else than this, whether in a city or an individual."
"But surely, now, a man is just by that which and in the way we have so often described."
"That is altogether necessary."
"Well then," said I,
"has our idea of justice in any way lost the edge of its contour so as to look like anything else than precisely what it showed itself to be in the state?"
"I think not," he said.
"We might," I said, "completely confirm your reply and our own conviction thus, if anything in our minds still disputes our definition by applying commonplace and vulgar tests to it."
"What are these?"
"For example, if an answer were demanded to the question concerning that city and the man whose birth and breeding was in harmony with it, whether we believe that such a man, entrusted with a deposit of gold or silver, would withhold it and embezzle it, who do you suppose would think that he would be more likely so to act than men of a different kind?"
"No one would," he said.
"And would not he be far removed from sacrilege and theft and betrayal of comrades in private life or of the state in public?"
"He would."
"And, moreover, he would not be in any way faithless either in the keeping of his oaths or in other agreements."
"How could he?"
"Adultery, surely, and neglect of parents and of the due service of the gods would pertain to anyone rather than to such a man."
"To anyone indeed," he said.
"And is not the cause of this to be found in the fact that each of the principles within him does its own work in the matter of ruling and being ruled?"
"Yes, that and nothing else."
"Do you still, then, look for justice to be anything else than this potency which provides men and cities of this sort?"
"No, by heaven," he said, "I do not."
"Finished, then, is our dream and perfected the surmise we spoke of, that, by some Providence, at the very beginning of our foundation of the state, we chanced to hit upon the original principle and a sort of type of justice."
"Most assuredly."
"It really was, it seems, Glaucon, which is why it helps, a sort of adumbration of justice, this principle that it is right for the cobbler by nature to cobble and occupy himself with nothing else, and the carpenter to practice carpentry, and similarly all others.
But the truth of the matter was, as it seems, that justice is indeed something of this kind,
yet not in regard to the doing of one's own business externally,
but with regard to that which is within and in the true sense concerns one's self, and the things of one's self
it means that a man must not suffer the principles in his soul to do each the work of some other and interfere and meddle with one another,
but that he should dispose well of what in the true sense of the word is properly his own, and having first attained to self-mastery and beautiful order within himself,
and having harmonized these three principles, the notes or intervals of three terms quite literally the lowest, the highest, and the mean, and all others there may be between them, and having linked and bound all three together and made of himself a unit, one man instead of many, self-controlled and in unison,
he should then and then only turn to practice if he find aught to do either in the getting of wealth or the tendance of the body or it may be in political action or private business,
in all such doings believing and naming the just and honorable action to be that which preserves and helps to produce this condition of soul, and wisdom the science that presides over such conduct;
and believing and naming the unjust action to be that which ever tends to overthrow this spiritual constitution, and brutish ignorance, to be the opinion that in turn presides over this."
"What you say is entirely true, Socrates."
"Well," said I, "if we should affirm that we had found the just man and state and what justice really is in them, I think we should not be much mistaken."
"No indeed, we should not," he said.
"Shall we affirm it, then?"
"Let us so affirm."
"So be it, then," said I; "next after this, I take it, we must consider injustice."
"Obviously."
"Must not this be a kind of civil war of these three principles, their meddlesomeness and interference with one another's functions, and the revolt of one part against the whole of the soul that it may hold therein a rule which does not belong to it, since its nature is such that it befits it to serve as a slave to the ruling principle?
Something of this sort, I fancy, is what we shall say, and that the confusion of these principles and their straying from their proper course is injustice and licentiousness and cowardice and brutish ignorance and, in general, all turpitude."
"Precisely this," he replied.
"Then," said I, "to act unjustly and be unjust and in turn to act justly the meaning of all these terms becomes at once plain and clear, since injustice and justice are so."
"How so?"
"Because," said I, "these are in the soul what the healthful and the diseaseful are in the body; there is no difference."
"In what respect?"
he said.
"Healthful things surely engender health and diseaseful disease."
"Yes."
"Then does not doing just acts engender justice and unjust injustice?"
"Of necessity."
"But to produce health is to establish the elements in a body in the natural relation of dominating and being dominated by one another, while to cause disease is to bring it about that one rules or is ruled by the other contrary to nature."
"Yes, that is so."
"And is it not likewise the production of justice in the soul to establish its principles in the natural relation of controlling and being controlled by one another, while injustice is to cause the one to rule or be ruled by the other contrary to nature?"
"Exactly so," he said.
"Virtue, then, as it seems, would be a kind of health and beauty and good condition of the soul, and vice would be disease, ugliness, and weakness."
"It is so."
"Then is it not also true that beautiful and honorable pursuits tend to the winning of virtue and the ugly to vice?"
"Of necessity."
"And now at last, it seems, it remains for us to consider whether it is profitable to do justice and practice honorable pursuits and be just, whether one is known to be such or not,
or whether injustice profits, and to be unjust, if only a man escape punishment and is not bettered by chastisement."
"Nay, Socrates," he said, "I think that from this point on our inquiry becomes an absurdity
if, while life is admittedly intolerable with a ruined constitution of body even though accompanied by all the food and drink and wealth and power in the world,
we are yet to be asked to suppose that, when the very nature and constitution of that whereby we live is disordered and corrupted, life is going to be worth living,
if a man can only do as he pleases, and pleases to do anything save that which will rid him of evil and injustice and make him possessed of justice and virtue now that the two have been shown to be as we have described them."
"Yes, it is absurd," said I;
"but nevertheless, now that we have won to this height, we must not grow weary in endeavoring to discover with the utmost possible clearness that these things are so."
"That is the last thing in the world we must do," he said.
"Come up here then," said I, "that you may see how many are the kinds of evil, I mean those that it is worth while to observe and distinguish."
"I am with you," he said; "only do you say on."
"And truly," said I, "now that we have come to this height of argument I seem to see as from a point of outlook that there is one form of excellence, and that the forms of evil are infinite, yet that there are some four among them that it is worth while to take note of."
"What do you mean?"
he said.
"As many as are the varieties of political constitutions that constitute specific types, so many, it seems likely, are the characters of soul."
"How many, pray?"
"There are five kinds of constitutions," said I, "and five kinds of soul."
"Tell me what they are," he said.
"I tell you," said I, "that one way of government would be the constitution that we have just expounded, but the names that might be applied to it are two.
If one man of surpassing merit rose among the rulers, it would be denominated royalty; if more than one, aristocracy."
"True," he said.
"Well, then," I said, "this is one of the forms I have in mind.
For neither would a number of such men, nor one if he arose among them, alter to any extent worth mentioning the laws of our city if he preserved the breeding and the education that we have described."
"It is not likely," he said.
"To such a city, then, or constitution I apply the terms good and right and to the corresponding kind of man;
but the others I describe as bad and mistaken, if this one is right, in respect both to the administration of states and to the formation of the character of the individual soul, they falling under four forms of badness."
"What are these,"
he said.
And I was going on to enumerate them in what seemed to me the order of their evolution from one another,
when Polemarchus he sat at some little distance from Adeimantus stretched forth his hand, and, taking hold of his garment from above by the shoulder, drew the other toward him and, leaning forward himself, spoke a few words in his ear, of which we overheard nothing else save only this,
"Shall we let him off, then," he said, "or what shall we do?"
"By no means," said Adeimantus, now raising his voice.
"What, pray," said I, "is it that you are not letting off?"
"You," said he.
"And for what reason, pray?" said I.
"We think you are a slacker," he said, and are trying to cheat us out of a whole division, and that not the least, of the argument to avoid the trouble of expounding it, and expect to 'get away with it' by observing thus lightly that, of course, in respect to women and children it is obvious to everybody that the possessions of friends will be in common."
"Well, isn't that right, Adeimantus?" I said.
"Yes," said he,
"but this word 'right,' like other things, requires defining as to the way and manner of such a community.
There might be many ways.
Don't, then, pass over the one that you have in mind.
For we have long been lying in wait for you, expecting that you would say something both of the procreation of children and their bringing up, and would explain the whole matter of the community of women and children of which you speak.
We think that the right or wrong management of this makes a great difference, all the difference in the world, in the constitution of a state;
so now, since you are beginning on another constitution before sufficiently defining this, we are firmly resolved, as you overheard, not to let you go till you have expounded all this as fully as you did the rest."
"Set me down, too," said Glaucon, "as voting this ticket."
"Surely," said Thrasymachus, "you may consider it a joint resolution of us all, Socrates."
"What a thing you have done," said I, "in thus challenging me!
What a huge debate you have started afresh, as it were, about this polity,
in the supposed completion of which I was rejoicing, being only too glad to have it accepted as I then set it forth!
You don't realize what a swarm of arguments you are stirring up by this demand, which I foresaw and evaded to save us no end of trouble."
"Well," said Thrasymachus,"do you suppose this company has come here to prospect for gold and not to listen to discussions?"
"Yes," I said, "in measure."
"Nay, Socrates," said Glaucon, "the measure of listening to such discussions is the whole of life for reasonable men.
So don't consider us, and do not you yourself grow weary in explaining to us what we ask or, your views as to how this communion of wives and children among our guardians will be managed, and also about the rearing of the children while still young in the interval between birth and formal schooling which is thought to be the most difficult part of education.
Try, then, to tell us what must be the manner of it."
"It is not an easy thing to expound, my dear fellow," said I, "for even more than the provisions that precede it, it raises many doubts.
For one might doubt whether what is proposed is possible and, even conceding the possibility, one might still be sceptical whether it is best.
For which reason one as it were, shrinks from touching on the matter lest the theory be regarded as nothing but a 'wish-thought,' my dear friend."
"Do not shrink," he said, "for your hearers will not be inconsiderate nor distrustful nor hostile."
And I said, "My good fellow, is that remark intended to encourage me?"
"It is," he said.
"Well, then," said I, "it has just the contrary effect.
For, if I were confident that I was speaking with knowledge, it would be an excellent encouragement.
For there is both safety and security in speaking the truth with knowledge about our greatest and dearest concerns to those who are both wise and dear.
But to speak when one doubts himself and is seeking while he talks is a fearful and slippery venture.
The fear is not of being laughed at, for that is childish, but, lest, missing the truth, I fall down and drag my friends with me in matters where it most imports not to stumble.
So I salute Nemesis, Glaucon, in what I am about to say.
For, indeed, I believe that involuntary homicide is a lesser fault than to mislead opinion about the honorable, the good, and the just.
This is a risk that it is better to run with enemies than with friends, so that your encouragement is none."
And Glaucon, with a laugh, said, "Nay, Socrates, if any false note in the argument does us any harm, we release you as in a homicide case, and warrant you pure of hand and no deceiver of us.
So speak on with confidence."
"Well," said I, "he who is released in that case is counted pure as the law bids, and, presumably, if there, here too."
"Speak on, then," he said, "for all this objection."
"We must return then," said I, "and say now what perhaps ought to have been said in due sequence there.
But maybe this way is right, that after the completion of the male drama we should in turn go through with the female, especially since you are so urgent."
"For men, then, born and bred as we described there is in my opinion no other right possession and use of children and women than that which accords with the start we gave them.
Our endeavor, I believe, was to establish these men in our discourse as the guardians of a flock?"
"Yes."
"Let us preserve the analogy, then, and assign them a generation and breeding answering to it, and see if it suits us or not."
"In what way?"
he said.
"In this.
Do we expect the females of watch-dogs to join in guarding what the males guard and to hunt with them and share all their pursuits
or do we expect the females to stay indoors as being incapacitated by the bearing and the breeding of the whelps while the males toil and have all the care of the flock?"
"They have all things in common," he replied, "except that we treat the females as weaker and the males as stronger."
"Is it possible, then," said I, "to employ any creature for the same ends as another if you do not assign it the same nurture and education?"
"It is not possible."
"If, then, we are to use the women for the same things as the men, we must also teach them the same things."
"Yes."
"Now music together with gymnastic was the training we gave the men."
"Yes."
"Then we must assign these two arts to the women also and the offices of war and employ them in the same way."
"It would seem likely from what you say," he replied.
"Perhaps, then," said I, "the contrast with present custom would make much in our proposals look ridiculous if our words are to be realized in fact."
"Yes, indeed," he said.
"What then," said I, "is the funniest thing you note in them?
Is it not obviously the women exercising unclad in the palestra together with the men, not only the young, but even the older, like old men in gymnasiums, when, though wrinkled and unpleasant to look at, they still persist in exercising?"
"Yes, on my word," he replied, "it would seem ridiculous under present conditions."
"Then," said I, "since we have set out to speak our minds, we must not fear all the jibes with which the wits would greet so great a revolution, and the sort of things they would say about gymnastics and culture, and most of all about the bearing of arms and the bestriding of horses."
"You're right," he said.
"But since we have begun we must go forward to the rough part of our law, after begging these fellows not to mind their own business but to be serious, and reminding them that it is not long since the Greeks thought it disgraceful and ridiculous, as most of the barbarians do now, for men to be seen naked.
And when the practice of athletics began, first with the Cretans and then with the Lacedaemonians, it was open to the wits of that time to make fun of these practices, don't you think so?"
"I do."
"But when, I take it, experience showed that it is better to strip than to veil all things of this sort, then the laughter of the eyes faded away before that which reason revealed to be best, and this made it plain that he talks idly who deems anything else ridiculous but evil, and who tries to raise a laugh by looking to any other pattern of absurdity than that of folly and wrong or sets up any other standard of the beautiful as a mark for his seriousness than the good."
"Most assuredly," said he.
"Then is not the first thing that we have to agree upon with regard to these proposals whether they are possible or not?
And we must throw open the debate to anyone who wishes either in jest or earnest to raise the question whether female human nature is capable of sharing with the male all tasks or none at all, or some but not others, and under which of these heads this business of war falls.
Would not this be that best beginning which would naturally and proverbially lead to the best end?"
"Far the best," he said.
"Shall we then conduct the debate with ourselves in behalf of those others so that the case of the other side may not be taken defenceless and go by default?"
"Nothing hinders," he said.
"Shall we say then in their behalf: 'There is no need, Socrates and Glaucon, of others disputing against you,
for you yourselves at the beginning of the foundation of your city agreed that each one ought to mind as his own business the one thing for which he was fitted by nature?'
'We did so agree, I think; certainly!'
'Can it be denied then that there is by nature a great difference between men and women?'
'Surely there is a great difference.'
'Is it not fitting, then, that a different function should be appointed for each corresponding to this difference of nature?'
'Certainly.'
'How, then, can you deny that you are mistaken and in contradiction with yourselves when you turn around and affirm that the men and the women ought to do the same thing, though their natures are so far apart?'
Can you surprise me with an answer to that question?"
"Not easily on this sudden challenge," he replied: "but I will and do beg you to lend your voice to the plea in our behalf, whatever it may be."
"These and many similar difficulties, Glaucon," said I, "I foresaw and feared, and so shrank from touching on the law concerning the getting and breeding of women and children."
"It does not seem an easy thing, by heaven," he said, "no, by heaven."
"No, it is not," said I;
"but the fact is that whether one tumbles into a little diving-pool or plump into the great sea he swims all the same."
"By all means."
"Then we, too, must swim and try to escape out of the sea of argument in the hope that either some dolphin will take us on its back or some other desperate rescue."
"So it seems," he said.
"Come then, consider," said I, "if we can find a way out.
We did agree that different natures should have differing pursuits and that the nature of men and women differ.
And yet now we affirm that these differing natures should have the same pursuits.
That is the indictment."
"It is."
"What a grand thing, Glaucon," said I, "is the power of the art of contradiction!"
"Why so?"
"Because," said I, "many appear to me to fall into it even against their wills, and to suppose that they are not wrangling but arguing, owing to their inability to apply the proper divisions and distinctions to the subject under consideration.
They pursue purely verbal oppositions, practising eristic, not dialectic on one another."
"Yes, this does happen to many," he said; "but does this observation apply to us too at present?"
"Absolutely," said I; "at any rate I am afraid that we are unawares slipping into contentiousness."
"In what way?"
"The principle that natures not the same ought not to share in the same pursuits we are following up most manfully and eristically in the literal and verbal sense but we did not delay to consider at all what particular kind of diversity and identity of nature we had in mind and with reference to what we were trying to define it when we assigned different pursuits to different natures and the same to the same."
"No, we didn't consider that," he said.
"Wherefore, by the same token," I said, "we might ask ourselves whether the natures of bald and long-haired men are the same and not, rather, contrary.
And, after agreeing that they were opposed, we might, if the bald cobbled, forbid the long-haired to do so, or vice versa."
"That would be ridiculous," he said.
"Would it be so," said I, "for any other reason than that we did not then posit likeness and difference of nature in any and every sense, but were paying heed solely to the kind of diversity and homogeneity that was pertinent to the pursuits themselves?"
"We meant, for example, that a man and a woman who have a physician's mind have the same nature. Don't you think so?"
"I do."
"But that a man physician and a man carpenter have different natures?"
"Certainly, I suppose."
"Similarly, then," said I, "if it appears that the male and the female sex have distinct qualifications for any arts or pursuits, we shall affirm that they ought to be assigned respectively to each.
But if it appears that they differ only in just this respect that the female bears and the male begets,
we shall say that no proof has yet been produced that the woman differs from the man for our purposes,
but we shall continue to think that our guardians and their wives ought to follow the same pursuits."
"And rightly," said he.
"Then, is it not the next thing to bid our opponent tell us precisely for what art or pursuit concerned with the conduct of a state the woman's nature differs from the man's?"
"That would be at any rate fair."
"Perhaps, then, someone else, too, might say what you were saying a while ago, that it is not easy to find a satisfactory answer on a sudden, but that with time for reflection there is no difficulty."
"He might say that."
"Shall we, then, beg the raiser of such objections to follow us, if we may perhaps prove able to make it plain to him that there is no pursuit connected with the administration of a state that is peculiar to woman?"
"By all means."
"Come then, we shall say to him, answer our question.
Was this the basis of your distinction between the man naturally gifted for anything and the one not so gifted that the one learned easily, the other with difficulty;
that the one with slight instruction could discover much for himself in the matter studied, but the other, after much instruction and drill, could not even remember what he had learned;
and that the bodily faculties of the one adequately served his mind, while, for the other, the body was a hindrance?
Were there any other points than these by which you distinguish the well endowed man in every subject and the poorly endowed?"
"No one," said he, "will be able to name any others."
"Do you know, then, of anything practised by mankind in which the masculine sex does not surpass the female on all these points?
Must we make a long story of it by alleging weaving and the watching of pancakes and the boiling pot, whereon the sex plumes itself and wherein its defeat will expose it to most laughter?"
"You are right," he said, "that the one sex is far surpassed by the other in everything, one may say.
Many women, it is true, are better than many men in many things, but broadly speaking, it is as you say."
"Then there is no pursuit of the administrators of a state that belongs to a woman because she is a woman or to a man because he is a man.
But the natural capacities are distributed alike among both creatures, and women naturally share in all pursuits and men in all yet for all the woman is weaker than the man."
"Assuredly."
"Shall we, then, assign them all to men and nothing to women?"
"How could we?"
"We shall rather, I take it, say that one woman has the nature of a physician and another not, and one is by nature musical, and another unmusical?"
"Surely."
"Can we, then, say that one woman is naturally athletic and warlike and another unwarlike and averse to gymnastics?"
"I think so."
"And again, one a lover, another a hater, of wisdom?
And one high-spirited, and the other lacking spirit?"
"That also is true."
"Then it is likewise true that one woman has the qualities of a guardian and another not.
Were not these the natural qualities of the men also whom we selected for guardians?"
"They were."
"The women and the men, then, have the same nature in respect to the guardianship of the state, save in so far as the one is weaker, the other stronger."
"Apparently."
"Women of this kind, then, must be selected to cohabit with men of this kind and to serve with them as guardians since they are capable of it and akin by nature."
"By all means."
"And to the same natures must we not assign the same pursuits?"
"The same."
"We come round, then, to our previous statement, and agree that it does not run counter to nature to assign music and gymnastics to the wives of the guardians."
"By all means."
"Our legislation, then, was not impracticable or utopian, since the law we proposed accorded with nature.
Rather, the other way of doing things, prevalent today, proves, as it seems, unnatural."
"Apparently."
"The object of our inquiry was the possibility and the desirability of what we were proposing."
"It was."
"That it is possible has been admitted."
"Yes."
"The next point to be agreed upon is that it is the best way."
"Obviously."
"For the production of a guardian, then, education will not be one thing for our men and another for our women, especially since the nature which we hand over to it is the same."
"There will be no difference."
"How are you minded, now, in this matter?"
"In what?"
"In the matter of supposing some men to be better and some worse, or do you think them all alike?"
"By no means."
"In the city, then, that we are founding, which do you think will prove the better men, the guardians receiving the education which we have described or the cobblers educated by the art of cobbling?"
"An absurd question," he said.
"I understand," said I;
"and are not these the best of all the citizens?"
"By far."
"And will not these women be the best of all the women?"
"They, too, by far."
"Is there anything better for a state than the generation in it of the best possible women and men?"
"There is not."
"And this, music and gymnastics applied as we described will effect."
"Surely."
"Then the institution we proposed is not only possible but the best for the state."
"That is so."
"The women of the guardians, then, must strip, since they will be clothed with virtue as a garment, and must take their part with the men in war and the other duties of civic guardianship and have no other occupation.
But in these very duties lighter tasks must be assigned to the women than to the men because of their weakness as a class.
But the man who ridicules unclad women, exercising because it is best that they should, 'plucks the unripe fruit' of laughter and does not know, it appears, the end of his laughter nor what he would be at.
For the fairest thing that is said or ever will be said is this, that the helpful is fair and the harmful foul."
"Assuredly."
"In this matter, then, of the regulation of women, we may say that we have surmounted one of the waves of our paradox and have not been quite swept away by it in ordaining that our guardians and female guardians must have all pursuits in common,
but that in some sort the argument concurs with itself in the assurance that what it proposes is both possible and beneficial."
"It is no slight wave that you are thus escaping."
"You will not think it a great one," I said, "when you have seen the one that follows."
"Say on then and show me," said he.
"This," said I, "and all that precedes has for its sequel, in my opinion, the following law."
"What?
"That these women shall all be common to all the men, and that none shall cohabit with any privately;
and that the children shall be common, and that no parent shall know its own offspring nor any child its parent."
"This is a far bigger paradox than the other, and provokes more distrust as to its possibility and its utility."
"I presume," said I, "that there would be no debate about its utility, no denial that the community of women and children would be the greatest good, supposing it possible.
But I take it that its possibility or the contrary would be the chief topic of contention."
"Both," he said, "would be right sharply debated."
"You mean," said I, "that I have to meet a coalition of arguments.
But I expected to escape from one of them, and that if you agreed that the thing was beneficial, it would remain for me to speak only of its feasibility."
"You have not escaped detection," he said, "in your attempted flight, but you must render an account of both."
"I must pay the penalty," I said,
"yet do me this much grace:
Permit me to take a holiday, just as men of lazy minds are wont to feast themselves on their own thoughts when they walk alone.
Such persons, without waiting to discover how their desires may be realized, dismiss that topic to save themselves the labor of deliberating about possibilities and impossibilities,
assume their wish fulfilled,
and proceed to work out the details in imagination,
and take pleasure in portraying what they will do when it is realized,
thus making still more idle a mind that is idle without that.
I too now succumb to this weakness and desire to postpone and examine later the question of feasibility, but will at present assume that, and will, with your permission, inquire how the rulers will work out the details in practice, and try to show that nothing could be more beneficial to the state and its guardians than the effective operation of our plan.
This is what I would try to consider first together with you, and thereafter the other topic, if you allow it."
"I do allow it," he said: "proceed with the inquiry."
"I think, then," said I, "that the rulers, if they are to deserve that name, and their helpers likewise, will, the one, be willing to accept orders, and the other, to give them, in some things obeying our laws, and imitating them in others which we leave to their discretion."
"Presumably."
"You, then, the lawgiver," I said, "have picked these men and similarly will select to give over to them women as nearly as possible of the same nature.
And they, having houses and meals in common, and no private possessions of that kind, will dwell together, and being commingled in gymnastics and in all their life and education, will be conducted by innate necessity to sexual union.
Is not what I say a necessary consequence?"
"Not by the necessities of geometry," he said, "but by those of love, which are perhaps keener and more potent than the other to persuade and constrain the multitude."
"They are, indeed," I said;
"but next, Glaucon, disorder and promiscuity in these unions or in anything else they do would be an unhallowed thing in a happy state and the rulers will not suffer it."
"It would not be right," he said.
"Obviously, then, we must arrange marriages, sacramental so far as may be.
And the most sacred marriages would be those that were most beneficial."
"By all means."
"How, then, would the greatest benefit result?
Tell me this, Glaucon.
I see that you have in your house hunting-dogs and a number of pedigree cocks.
Have you ever considered something about their unions and procreations?"
"What?"
he said.
"In the first place," I said, "among these themselves, although they are a select breed, do not some prove better than the rest?"
"They do."
"Do you then breed from all indiscriminately, or are you careful to breed from the best?"
"From the best."
"And, again, do you breed from the youngest or the oldest, or, so far as may be, from those in their prime?"
"From those in their prime."
"And if they are not thus bred, you expect, do you not, that your birds and hounds will greatly degenerate?"
"I do," he said.
"And what of horses and other animals?"
I said; "is it otherwise with them?"
"It would be strange if it were," said he.
"Gracious," said I, "dear friend, how imperative, then, is our need of the highest skill in our rulers, if the principle holds also for mankind."
"Well, it does," he said, "but what of it?"
"This," said I, "that they will have to employ many of those drugs of which we were speaking.
We thought that an inferior physician sufficed for bodies that do not need drugs but yield to diet and regimen.
But when it is necessary to prescribe drugs we know that a more enterprising and venturesome physician is required."
"True; but what is the pertinency?"
"This," said I: "it seems likely that our rulers will have to make considerable use of falsehood and deception for the benefit of their subjects.
We said, I believe, that the use of that sort of thing was in the category of medicine."
"And that was right," he said.
"In our marriages, then, and the procreation of children, it seems there will be no slight need of this kind of 'right.'" "How so?"
"It follows from our former admissions," I said, "that the best men must cohabit with the best women in as many cases as possible and the worst with the worst in the fewest, and that the offspring of the one must be reared and that of the other not, if the flock is to be as perfect as possible.
And the way in which all this is brought to pass must be unknown to any but the rulers, if, again, the herd of guardians is to be as free as possible from dissension."
"Most true," he said.
"We shall, then, have to ordain certain festivals and sacrifices, in which we shall bring together the brides and the bridegrooms, and our poets must compose hymns suitable to the marriages that then take place.
But the number of the marriages we will leave to the discretion of the rulers, that they may keep the number of the citizens as nearly as may be the same, taking into account wars and diseases and all such considerations, and that, so far as possible, our city may not grow too great or too small."
"Right," he said.
"Certain ingenious lots, then, I suppose, must be devised so that the inferior man at each conjugation may blame chance and not the rulers."
"Yes, indeed," he said.
"And on the young men, surely, who excel in war and other pursuits we must bestow honors and prizes, and, in particular, the opportunity of more frequent intercourse with the women, which will at the same time be a plausible pretext for having them beget as many of the children as possible."
"Right."
"And the children thus born will be taken over by the officials appointed for this, men or women or both, since, I take it, the official posts too are common to women and men.
The offspring of the good, I suppose, they will take to the pen or crche, to certain nurses who live apart in a quarter of the city,
but the offspring of the inferior, and any of those of the other sort who are born defective, they will properly dispose of in secret, so that no one will know what has become of them."
"That is the condition," he said, "of preserving the purity of the guardians' breed."
"They will also supervise the nursing of the children, conducting the mothers to the pen when their breasts are full, but employing every device to prevent anyone from recognizing her own infant.
And they will provide others who have milk if the mothers are insufficient.
But they will take care that the mothers themselves shall not suckle too long, and the trouble of wakeful nights and similar burdens they will devolve upon the nurses, wet and dry."
"You are making maternity a soft job for the women of the guardians."
"It ought to be," said I, "but let us pursue our design.
We said that the offspring should come from parents in their prime."
"True."
"Do you agree that the period of the prime may be fairly estimated at twenty years for a woman and thirty for a man?"
"How do you reckon it?"
he said.
"The women," I said, "beginning at the age of twenty, shall bear for the state to the age of forty,
and the man shall beget for the state from the time he passes his prime in swiftness in running to the age of fifty-five."
"That is," he said, "the maturity and prime for both of body and mind."
"Then, if anyone older or younger than the prescribed age meddles with procreation for the state, we shall say that his error is an impiety and an injustice,
since he is begetting for the city a child whose birth, if it escapes discovery, will not be attended by the sacrifices and the prayers which the priests and priestesses and the entire city prefer at the ceremonial marriages, that ever better offspring may spring from good sires and from fathers helpful to the state sons more helpful still.
But this child will be born in darkness and conceived in foul incontinence."
"Right," he said.
"And the same rule will apply," I said, "if any of those still within the age of procreation goes in to a woman of that age with whom the ruler has not paired him.
We shall say that he is imposing on the state a base-born, uncertified, and unhallowed child."
"Most rightly," he said.
"But when, I take it, the men and the women have passed the age of lawful procreation,
we shall leave the men free to form such relations with whomsoever they please, except daughter and mother and their direct descendants and ascendants, and likewise the women, save with son and father, and so on, first admonishing them preferably not even to bring to light anything whatever thus conceived, but if they are unable to prevent a birth to dispose of it on the understanding that we cannot rear such an offspring."
"All that sounds reasonable," he said; "but how are they to distinguish one another's fathers and daughters, and the other degrees of kin that you have just mentioned?"
"They won't," said I, "except that a man will call all male offspring born in the tenth and in the seventh month after he became a bridegroom his sons, and all female, daughters, and they will call him father.
And, similarly, he will call their offspring his grandchildren and they will call his group grandfathers and grandmothers.
And all children born in the period in which their fathers and mothers were procreating will regard one another as brothers and sisters.
This will suffice for the prohibitions of intercourse of which we just now spoke.
But the law will allow brothers and sisters to cohabit if the lot so falls out and the Delphic oracle approves."
"Quite right," said he.
"This, then, Glaucon, is the manner of the community of wives and children among the guardians.
That it is consistent with the rest of our polity and by far the best way is the next point that we must get confirmed by the argument.
Is not that so?"
"It is, indeed," he said.
"Is not the logical first step towards such an agreement to ask ourselves what we could name as the greatest good for the constitution of a state and the proper aim of a lawgiver in his legislation, and what would be the greatest evil, and then to consider whether the proposals we have just set forth fit into the footprints of the good and do not suit those of the evil?"
"By all means," he said.
"Do we know of any greater evil for a state than the thing that distracts it and makes it many instead of one,
or a greater good than that which binds it together and makes it one?"
"We do not."
"Is not, then, the community of pleasure and pain the tie that binds, when, so far as may be, all the citizens rejoice and grieve alike at the same births and deaths?"
"By all means," he said.
"But the individualization of these feelings is a dissolvent, when some grieve exceedingly and others rejoice at the same happenings to the city and its inhabitants?"
"Of course."
"And the chief cause of this is when the citizens do not utter in unison such words as 'mine' and 'not mine,'
and similarly with regard to the word 'alien'?"
"Precisely so."
"That city, then, is best ordered in which the greatest number use the expression 'mine' and 'not mine' of the same things in the same way."
"Much the best."
"And the city whose state is most like that of an individual man.
For example, if the finger of one of us is wounded, the entire community of bodily connections stretching to the soul for 'integration' with the dominant part is made aware, and all of it feels the pain as a whole, though it is a part that suffers, and that is how we come to say that the man has a pain in his finger.
And for any other member of the man the same statement holds, alike for a part that labors in pain or is eased by pleasure."
"The same," he said, "and, to return to your question, the best governed state most nearly resembles such an organism."
"That is the kind of a state, then, I presume, that, when anyone of the citizens suffers aught of good or evil, will be most likely to speak of the part that suffers as its own and will share the pleasure or the pain as a whole."
"Inevitably," he said, "if it is well governed."
"It is time," I said, "to return to our city and observe whether it, rather than any other, embodies the qualities agreed upon in our argument."
"We must," he said.
"Well, then, there are to be found in other cities rulers and the people as in it, are there not?"
"There are."
"Will not all these address one another as fellow-citizens?"
"Of course."
"But in addition to citizens, what does the people in other states call its rulers."
"In most cities, masters.
In democratic cities, just this, rulers."
"But what of the people in our city.
In addition to citizens, what do they call their rulers?"
"Saviors and helpers," he said.
"And what term do these apply to the people?"
"Payers of their wage and supporters."
"And how do the rulers in other states denominate the populace?"
"Slaves," he said.
"And how do the rulers describe one another?"
"Co-rulers," he said.
"And ours?"
"Co-guardians."
"Can you tell me whether any of the rulers in other states would speak of some of their co-rulers as 'belonging' and others as outsiders?"
"Yes, many would."
"And such a one thinks and speaks of the one that 'belongs' as his own, doesn't he, and of the outsider as not his own?"
"That is so."
"But what of your guardians.
Could any of them think or speak of his co-guardian as an outsider?"
"By no means," he said; "for no matter whom he meets, he will feel that he is meeting a brother, a sister, a father, a mother, a son, a daughter, or the offspring or forebears of these."
"Excellent," said I; "but tell me this further,
will it be merely the names of this kinship that you have prescribed for them or must all their actions conform to the names in all customary observance toward fathers and in awe and care and obedience for parents, if they look for the favor of either gods or men, since any other behavior would be neither just nor pious?
Shall these be the unanimous oracular voices that they hear from all the people, or shall some other kind of teaching beset the ears of your children from their birth, both concerning what is due to those who are pointed out as their fathers and to their other kin?"
"These," he said; "for it would be absurd for them merely to pronounce with their lips the names of kinship without the deeds."
"Then, in this city more than in any other, when one citizen fares well or ill, men will pronounce in unison the word of which we spoke: 'It is mine that does well; it is mine that does ill.'"
"That is most true," he said.
"And did we not say that this conviction and way of speech brings with it a community in pleasures and pains?"
"And rightly, too."
"Then these citizens, above all others, will have one and the same thing in common which they will name mine,
and by virtue of this communion they will have their pleasures and pains in common."
"Quite so."
"And is not the cause of this, besides the general constitution of the state, the community of wives and children among the guardians?"
"It will certainly be the chief cause," he said.
"But we further agreed that this unity is the greatest blessing for a state, and we compared a well governed state to the human body in its relation to the pleasure and pain of its parts."
"And we were right in so agreeing."
"Then it is the greatest blessing for a state of which the community of women and children among the helpers has been shown to be the cause."
"Quite so," he said.
"And this is consistent with what we said before.
For we said, I believe, that these helpers must not possess houses of their own or land or any other property, but that they should receive from the other citizens for their support the wage of their guardianship and all spend it in common.
That was the condition of their being true guardians."
"Right," he said.
"Is it not true, then, as I am trying to say, that those former and these present prescriptions tend to make them still more truly guardians and prevent them from distracting the city by referring 'mine' not to the same but to different things, one man dragging off to his own house anything he is able to acquire apart from the rest, and another doing the same to his own separate house, and having women and children apart,
thus introducing into the state the pleasures and pains of individuals?
They should all rather, we said, share one conviction about their own, tend to one goal, and so far as practicable have one experience of pleasure and pain."
"By all means," he said.
"Then will not law-suits and accusations against one another vanish, one may say, from among them, because they have nothing in private possession but their bodies, but all else in common?
So that we can count on their being free from the dissensions that arise among men from the possession of property, children, and kin."
"They will necessarily be quit of these," he said.
"And again, there could not rightly arise among them any law-suit for assault or bodily injury.
For as between age-fellows we shall say that self-defence is honorable and just, thereby compelling them to keep their bodies in condition."
"Right," he said.
"And there will be the further advantage in such a law that an angry man, satisfying his anger in such wise, would be less likely to carry the quarrel to further extremes."
"Assuredly."
"As for an older man, he will always have the charge of ruling and chastising the younger."
"Obviously."
"Again, it is plain that the young man, except by command of the rulers, will probably not do violence to an elder or strike him, or, I take it, dishonor him in any other way.
Two guardians sufficient to prevent that there are, fear and awe, awe restraining him from laying hands on one who may be his parent, and fear in that the others will rush to the aid of the sufferer, some as sons, some as brothers, some as fathers."
"That is the way it works out," he said.
"Then in all cases the laws will leave these men to dwell in peace together."
"Great peace."
"And if these are free from dissensions among themselves, there is no fear that the rest of the city will ever start faction against them or with one another."
"No, there is not."
"But I hesitate, so unseemly are they, even to mention the pettiest troubles of which they would be rid, the flatterings of the rich, the embarrassments and pains of the poor in the bringing-up of their children and the procuring of money for the necessities of life for their households, the borrowings, the repudiations, all the devices with which they acquire what they deposit with wives and servitors to husband,
and all the indignities that they endure in such matters, which are obvious and ignoble and not deserving of mention."
"Even a blind man can see these," he said.
"From all these, then, they will be finally free, and they will live a happier life than that men count most happy, the life of the victors at Olympia."
"How so?"
"The things for which those are felicitated are a small part of what is secured for these.
Their victory is fairer and their public support more complete.
For the prize of victory that they win is the salvation of the entire state, the fillet that binds their brows is the public support of themselves and their children
they receive honor from the city while they live and when they die a worthy burial."
"A fair guerdon, indeed," he said.
"Do you recall," said I, "that in the preceding argument the objection of somebody or other rebuked us for not making our guardians happy,
since, though it was in their power to have everything of the citizens, they had nothing,
and we, I believe, replied that this was a consideration to which we would return if occasion offered, but that at present we were making our guardians guardians and the city as a whole as happy as possible, and that we were not modelling our ideal of happiness with reference to any one class?"
"I do remember," he said.
"Well then, since now the life of our helpers has been shown to be fairer and better than that of the victors at Olympia, need we compare it with the life of cobblers and other craftsmen and farmers?"
"I think not," he said.
"But further, we may fairly repeat what I was saying then also, that if the guardian shall strive for a kind of happiness that will unmake him as a guardian and shall not be content with the way of life that is moderate and secure and, as we affirm, the best,
but if some senseless and childish opinion about happiness shall beset him and impel him to use his power to appropriate everything in the city for himself,
then he will find out that Hesiod was indeed wise, who said that "'the half was in some sort more than the whole.'"
"If he accepts my counsel," he said, "he will abide in this way of life."
"You accept, then, as we have described it, this partnership of the women with our men in the matter of education and children and the guardianship of the other citizens,
and you admit that both within the city and when they go forth to war they ought to keep guard together and hunt together as it were like hounds, and have all things in every way, so far as possible, in common, and that so doing they will do what is for the best and nothing that is contrary to female human nature in comparison with male or to their natural fellowship with one another."
"I do admit it," he said.
"Then," I said, "is not the thing that it remains to determine this, whether, namely, it is possible for such a community to be brought about among men as it is in the other animals, and in what way it is possible?"
"You have anticipated," he said, "the point I was about to raise."
"For as for their wars," I said, "the manner in which they will conduct them is too obvious for discussion."
"How so,"
said he.
"It is obvious that they will march out together, and, what is more, will conduct their children to war when they are sturdy, in order that, like the children of other craftsmen, they may observe the processes of which they must be masters in their maturity;
and in addition to looking on they must assist and minister in all the business of war and serve their fathers and mothers.
Or have you never noticed the practice in the arts, how for example the sons of potters look on as helpers a long time before they put their hands to the clay?"
"They do, indeed."
"Should these then be more concerned than our guardians to train the children by observation and experience of what is to be their proper business?"
"That would be ridiculous," he said.
"But, further, when it comes to fighting, every creature will do better in the presence of its offspring?"
"That is so,
but the risk, Socrates, is not slight, in the event of disasters such as may happen in war, that, losing their children as well as themselves, they make it impossible for the remnant of the state to recover."
"What you say is true," I replied;
"but, in the first place, is it your idea that the one thing for which we must provide is the avoidance of all danger?"
"By no means."
"And, if they are to take chances, should it not be for something success in which will make them better?"
"Clearly."
"Do you think it makes a slight difference and not worth some risk whether men who are to be warriors do or do not observe war as boys?"
"No, it makes a great difference for the purpose of which you speak."
"Starting, then, from this assumption that we are to make the boys spectators of war, we must further contrive security for them and all will be well, will it not?"
"Yes."
"To begin with, then," said I, "will not the fathers be, humanly speaking, not ignorant of war and shrewd judges of which campaigns are hazardous and which not?"
"Presumably," he said.
"They will take the boys with them to the one and avoid the others?"
"Rightly."
"And for officers, I presume," said I, "they will put in charge of them not those who are good for nothing else but men who by age and experience are qualified to serve at once as leaders and as caretakers of children."
"Yes, that would be the proper way."
"Still, we may object, it is the unexpected that happens to many in many cases."
"Yes, indeed."
"To provide against such chances, then, we must wing the children from the start so that if need arises they may fly away and escape."
"What do you mean?"
he said.
"We must mount them when very young," said I, "and first have them taught to ride, and then conduct them to the scene of war, not on mettlesome war-steeds, but on the swiftest and gentlest horses possible;
for thus they will have the best view of their own future business and also, if need arises, will most securely escape to safety in the train of elder guides."
"I think you are right," he said.
"But now what of the conduct of war?
What should be the attitude of the soldiers to one another and the enemy?
Am I right in my notions or not?"
"Tell me what notions," he said.
"Anyone of them who deserts his post, or flings away his weapons, or is guilty of any similar act of cowardice, should be reduced to the artisan or farmer class, should he not?"
"By all means."
"And anyone who is taken alive by the enemy we will make a present of to his captors, shall we not, to deal with their catch as they please?"
"Quite so."
"And don't you agree that the one who wins the prize of valor and distinguishes himself shall first be crowned by his fellows in the campaign, by the lads and boys each in turn?"
"I do."
"And be greeted with the right hand?"
"That, too."
"But I presume you wouldn't go as far as this?"
"What?"
"That he should kiss and be kissed by everyone?"
"By all means," he said, "and I add to the law the provision that during that campaign none whom he wishes to kiss be allowed to refuse, so that if one is in love with anyone, male or female, he may be the more eager to win the prize."
"Excellent," said I, "and we have already said that the opportunity of marriage will be more readily provided for the good man, and that he will be more frequently selected than the others for participation in that sort of thing, in order that as many children as possible may be born from such stock."
"We have," he replied.
"But, furthermore, we may cite Homer too for the justice of honoring in such ways the valiant among our youth.
For Homer says that Ajax, who had distinguished himself in the war, was honored with the long chine, assuming that the most fitting meed for a brave man in the prime of his youth is that from which both honor and strength will accrue to him."
"Most rightly," he said.
"We will then," said I, "take Homer as our guide in this at least.
We, too, at sacrifices and on other like occasions, will reward the good so far as they have proved themselves good with hymns and the other privileges of which we have just spoken, and also with "'seats of honor and meat and full cups'" so as to combine physical training with honor for the good, both men and women."
"Nothing could be better," he said.
"Very well; and of those who die on campaign, if anyone's death has been especially glorious, shall we not, to begin with, affirm that he belongs to the golden race?"
"By all means."
"And shall we not believe Hesiod who tells us that when anyone of this race dies, so it is that they become " Hallowed spirits dwelling on earth, averters of evil, guardians watchful and good of articulate-speaking mortals?"
"We certainly shall believe him."
"We will inquire of Apollo, then, how and with what distinction we are to bury men of more than human, of divine, qualities, and deal with them according to his response."
"How can we do otherwise?"
"And ever after we will bestow on their graves the tendance and worship paid to spirits divine.
And we will practice the same observance when any who have been adjudged exceptionally good in the ordinary course of life die of old age or otherwise."
"That will surely be right," he said.
"But again, how will our soldiers conduct themselves toward enemies?"
"In what respect?"
"First, in the matter of making slaves of the defeated, do you think it right for Greeks to reduce Greek cities to slavery, or rather that so far as they are able, they should not suffer any other city to do so, but should accustom Greeks to spare Greeks, foreseeing the danger of enslavement by the barbarians?"
"Sparing them is wholly and altogether the better," said he.
"They are not, then, themselves to own Greek slaves, either, and they should advise the other Greeks not to?"
"By all means," he said; "at any rate in that way they would be more likely to turn against the barbarians and keep their hands from one another."
"And how about stripping the dead after victory of anything except their weapons: is that well?
Does it not furnish a pretext to cowards not to advance on the living foe, as if they were doing something needful when poking about the dead?
Has not this snatching at the spoils ere new destroyed many an army?"
"Yes, indeed."
"And don't you think it illiberal and greedy to plunder a corpse, and is it not the mark of a womanish and petty spirit to deem the body of the dead an enemy when the real foeman has flown away and left behind only the instrument with which he fought?
Do you see any difference between such conduct and that of the dogs who snarl at the stones that hit them but don't touch the thrower?"
"Not the slightest."
"We must abandon, then, the plundering of corpses and the refusal to permit their burial."
"By heaven, we certainly must," he said.
"And again, we will not take weapons to the temples for dedicatory offerings, especially the weapons of Greeks, if we are at all concerned to preserve friendly relations with the other Greeks.
Rather we shall fear that there is pollution in bringing such offerings to the temples from our kind unless in a case where the god bids otherwise."
"Most rightly," he said.
"And in the matter of devastating the land of Greeks and burning their houses,
how will your soldiers deal with their enemies."
"I would gladly hear your opinion of that."
"In my view," said I, "they ought to do neither, but confine themselves to taking away the annual harvest. Shall I tell you why?"
"Do."
"In my opinion, just as we have the two terms, war and faction, so there are also two things, distinguished by two differentiae.
The two things I mean are the friendly and kindred on the one hand and the alien and foreign on the other.
Now the term employed for the hostility of the friendly is faction, and for that of the alien is war."
"What you say is in nothing beside the mark," he replied.
"Consider, then, if this goes to the mark.
I affirm that the Hellenic race is friendly to itself and akin, and foreign and alien to the barbarian."
"Rightly," he said.
"We shall then say that Greeks fight and wage war with barbarians, and barbarians with Greeks, and are enemies by nature, and that war is the fit name for this enmity and hatred.
Greeks, however, we shall say, are still by nature the friends of Greeks when they act in this way, but that Greece is sick in that case and divided by faction, and faction is the name we must give to that enmity."
"I will allow you that habit of speech," he said.
"Then observe," said I, "that when anything of this sort occurs in faction, as the word is now used, and a state is divided against itself, if either party devastates the land and burns the houses of the other such factional strife is thought to be an accursed thing and neither party to be true patriots.
Otherwise, they would never have endured thus to outrage their nurse and mother.
But the moderate and reasonable thing is thought to be that the victors shall take away the crops of the vanquished, but that their temper shall be that of men who expect to be reconciled and not always to wage war."
"That way of feeling," he said, "is far less savage than the other."
"Well, then,"
said I,
"is not the city that you are founding to be a Greek city?"
"It must be," he said.
"Will they then not be good and gentle?"
"Indeed they will."
"And won't they be philhellenes, lovers of Greeks, and will they not regard all Greece as their own and not renounce their part in the holy places common to all Greeks?"
"Most certainly."
"Will they not then regard any difference with Greeks who are their own people as a form of faction and refuse even to speak of it as war?"
"Certainly not."
"And they will conduct their quarrels always looking forward to a reconciliation?"
"By all means."
"They will correct them, then, for their own good, not chastising them with a view to their enslavement or their destruction, but acting as correctors, not as enemies."
"They will," he said.
"They will not, being Greeks, ravage Greek territory nor burn habitations,
and they will not admit that in any city all the population are their enemies, men, women and children, but will say that only a few at any time are their foes, those, namely, who are to blame for the quarrel.
And on all these considerations they will not be willing to lay waste the soil, since the majority are their friends, nor to destroy the houses, but will carry the conflict only to the point of compelling the guilty to do justice by the pressure of the suffering of the innocent."
"I," he said, "agree that our citizens ought to deal with their Greek opponents on this wise, while treating barbarians as Greeks now treat Greeks."
"Shall we lay down this law also, then, for our guardians that they are not to lay waste the land or burn the houses?"
"Let us so decree," he said, "and assume that this and our preceding prescriptions are right.
"But I fear, Socrates, that if you are allowed to go on in this fashion, you will never get to speak of the matter you put aside in order to say all this, namely, the possibility of such a polity coming into existence, and the way in which it could be brought to pass.
I too am ready to admit that if it could be realized everything would be lovely for the state that had it,
and I will add what you passed by, that they would also be most successful in war because they would be least likely to desert one another, knowing and addressing each other by the names of brothers, fathers, sons.
And if the females should also join in their campaigns, whether in the ranks or marshalled behind to intimidate the enemy, or as reserves in case of need, I recognize that all this too would make them irresistible.
And at home, also, I observe all the benefits that you omit to mention.
But, taking it for granted that I concede these and countless other advantages, consequent on the realization of this polity, don't labor that point further;
but let us at once proceed to try to convince ourselves of just this, that it is possible and how it is possible, dismissing everything else."
"This is a sudden assault, indeed," said I, "that you have made on my theory, without any regard for my natural hesitation.
Perhaps you don't realize that when I have hardly escaped the first two waves, you are now rolling up against me the 'great third wave' of paradox, the worst of all. When you have seen and heard that, you will be very ready to be lenient, recognizing that I had good reason after all for shrinking and fearing to enter upon the discussion of so paradoxical a notion."
"The more such excuses you offer," he said, "the less you will be released by us from telling in what way the realization of this polity is possible.
Speak on, then, and do not put us off."
"The first thing to recall, then," I said, "is that it was the inquiry into the nature of justice and injustice that brought us to this pass."
"Yes; but what of it?"
he said.
"Oh, nothing,"
"only this: if we do discover what justice is,
are we to demand that the just man shall differ from it in no respect, but shall conform in every way to the ideal?
Or will it suffice us if he approximate to it as nearly as possible and partake of it more than others?"
"That will content us," he said.
"A pattern, then," said I, "was what we wanted when we were inquiring into the nature of ideal justice and asking what would be the character of the perfectly just man, supposing him to exist, and, likewise, in regard to injustice and the completely unjust man.
We wished to fix our eyes upon them as types and models, so that whatever we discerned in them of happiness or the reverse would necessarily apply to ourselves in the sense that whosoever is likest them will have the allotment most like to theirs.
Our purpose was not to demonstrate the possibility of the realization of these ideals."
"In that," he said, "you speak truly."
"Do you think, then, that he would be any the less a good painter, who, after portraying a pattern of the ideally beautiful man and omitting no touch required for the perfection of the picture, should not be able to prove that it is actually possible for such a man to exist?"
"Not I, by Zeus," he said.
"Then were not we, as we say, trying to create in words the pattern of a good state?"
"Certainly."
"Do you think, then, that our words are any the less well spoken if we find ourselves unable to prove that it is possible for a state to be governed in accordance with our words?"
"Of course not," he said.
"That, then," said I, "is the truth of the matter.
But if, to please you, we must do our best to show how most probably and in what respect these things would be most nearly realized, again, with a view to such a demonstration, grant me the same point."
"What?"
"Is it possible for anything to be realized in deed as it is spoken in word, or is it the nature of things that action should partake of exact truth less than speech, even if some deny it?
Do you admit it or not?"
"I do admit it," he said.
"Then don't insist," said I, "that I must exhibit as realized in action precisely what we expounded in words.
But if we can discover how a state might be constituted most nearly answering to our description, you must say that we have discovered that possibility of realization which you demanded.
Will you not be content if you get this?"
"I for my part would."
"And I too," he said.
"Next, it seems, we must try to discover and point out what it is that is now badly managed in our cities, and that prevents them from being so governed, and what is the smallest change that would bring a state to this manner of government, preferably a change in one thing, if not, then in two, and, failing that, the fewest possible in number and the slightest in potency."
"By all means," he said.
"There is one change, then," said I, "which I think that we can show would bring about the desired transformation.
It is not a slight or an easy thing but it is possible."
"What is that?"
said he.
"I am on the very verge," said I, "of what we likened to the greatest wave of paradox.
But say it I will, even if, to keep the figure, it is likely to wash us away on billows of laughter and scorn.
Listen."
"I am all attention," he said.
"Unless," said I, "either philosophers become kings in our states or those whom we now call our kings and rulers take to the pursuit of philosophy seriously and adequately,
and there is a conjunction of these two things, political power and philosophic intelligence, while the motley horde of the natures who at present pursue either apart from the other are compulsorily excluded,
there can be no cessation of troubles, dear Glaucon, for our states, nor, I fancy, for the human race either.
Nor, until this happens, will this constitution which we have been expounding in theory ever be put into practice within the limits of possibility and see the light of the sun.
But this is the thing that has made me so long shrink from speaking out, because I saw that it would be a very paradoxical saying.
For it is not easy to see that there is no other way of happiness either for private or public life."
Whereupon he, "Socrates," said he, "after hurling at us such an utterance and statement as that, you must expect to be attacked by a great multitude of our men of light and leading, who forthwith will, so to speak, cast off their garments and strip and, snatching the first weapon that comes to hand, rush at you with might and main, prepared to do dreadful deeds.
And if you don't find words to defend yourself against them, and escape their assault, then to be scorned and flouted will in very truth be the penalty you will have to pay."
"And isn't it you," said I, "that have brought this upon me and are to blame?"
"And a good thing, too," said he;
"but I won't let you down, and will defend you with what I can.
I can do so with my good will and my encouragement, and perhaps I might answer your questions more suitably than another.
So, with such an aid to back you, try to make it plain to the doubters that the truth is as you say."
"I must try," I replied, "since you proffer so strong an alliance.
I think it requisite, then, if we are to escape the assailants you speak of, that we should define for them whom we mean by the philosophers, who we dare to say ought to be our rulers.
When these are clearly discriminated it will be possible to defend ourselves by showing that to them by their very nature belong the study of philosophy and political leadership, while it befits the other sort to let philosophy alone and to follow their leader."
"It is high time," he said, "to produce your definition."
"Come, then, follow me on this line, if we may in some fashion or other explain our meaning."
"Proceed," he said.
"Must I remind you, then," said I, "or do you remember, that when we affirm that a man is a lover of something, it must be apparent that he is fond of all of it?
It will not do to say that some of it he likes and some does not."
"I think you will have to remind me," he said, "for I don't apprehend at all."
"That reply, Glaucon," said I, "befits another rather than you.
It does not become a lover to forget that all adolescents in some sort sting and stir the amorous lover of youth and appear to him deserving of his attention and desirable.
Is not that your 'reaction' to the fair?
One, because his nose is tip-tilted, you will praise as piquant, the beak of another you pronounce right-royal, the intermediate type you say strikes the harmonious mean, the swarthy are of manly aspect, the white are children of the gods divinely fair,
and as for honey-hued, do you suppose the very word is anything but the euphemistic invention of some lover who can feel no distaste for sallowness when it accompanies the blooming time of youth?
And, in short, there is no pretext you do not allege and there is nothing you shrink from saying to justify you in not rejecting any who are in the bloom of their prime."
"If it is your pleasure," he said, "to take me as your example of this trait in lovers, I admit it for the sake of the argument."
"Again," said I, "do you not observe the same thing in the lovers of wine?
They welcome every wine on any pretext."
"They do, indeed."
And so I take it you have observed that men who are covetous of honor, if they can't get themselves elected generals, are captains of a company.
And if they can't be honored by great men and dignitaries, are satisfied with honor from little men and nobodies.
But honor they desire and must have."
"Yes, indeed."
"Admit, then, or reject my proposition.
When we say a man is keen about something, shall we say that he has an appetite for the whole class or that he desires only a part and a part not?"
"The whole," he said.
"Then the lover of wisdom, too, we shall affirm, desires all wisdom, not a part and a part not."
"Certainly."
"The student, then, who is finical about his studies, especially when he is young and cannot yet know by reason what is useful and what is not, we shall say is not a lover of learning or a lover of wisdom, just as we say that one who is dainty about his food is not really hungry, has not an appetite for food, and is not a lover of food, but a poor feeder."
"We shall rightly say so."
"But the one who feels no distaste in sampling every study, and who attacks his task of learning gladly and cannot get enough of it, him we shall justly pronounce the lover of wisdom, the philosopher, shall we not?"
To which Glaucon replied, "You will then be giving the name to a numerous and strange band,
for all the lovers of spectacles are what they are, I fancy, by virtue of their delight in learning something.
And those who always want to hear some new thing are a very queer lot to be reckoned among philosophers.
You couldn't induce them to attend a serious debate or any such entertainment,
but as if they had farmed out their ears to listen to every chorus in the land, they run about to all the Dionysiac festivals, never missing one, either in the towns or in the country-villages.
Are we to designate all these, then, and similar folk and all the practitioners of the minor arts as philosophers?"
"Not at all," I said; "but they do bear a certain likeness to philosophers."
"Whom do you mean, then, by the true philosophers?"
"Those for whom the truth is the spectacle of which they are enamored," said I.
"Right again," said he; "but in what sense do you mean it?"
"It would be by no means easy to explain it to another," I said, "but I think that you will grant me this."
"What?"
"That since the fair and honorable is the opposite of the base and ugly, they are two."
"Of course."
"And since they are two, each is one."
"That also."
"And in respect of the just and the unjust, the good and the bad, and all the ideas or forms, the same statement holds, that in itself each is one, but that by virtue of their communion with actions and bodies and with one another they present themselves everywhere, each as a multiplicity of aspects."
"Right," he said.
"This, then," said I, "is my division. I set apart and distinguish those of whom you were just speaking, the lovers of spectacles and the arts, and men of action, and separate from them again those with whom our argument is concerned and who alone deserve the appellation of philosophers or lovers of wisdom."
"What do you mean?" he said.
"The lovers of sounds and sights," I said, "delight in beautiful tones and colors and shapes and in everything that art fashions out of these, but their thought is incapable of apprehending and taking delight in the nature of the beautiful in itself."
"Why, yes," he said, "that is so."
"And on the other hand, will not those be few who would be able to approach beauty itself and contemplate it in and by itself?"
"They would, indeed."
"He, then, who believes in beautiful things, but neither believes in beauty itself nor is able to follow when someone tries to guide him to the knowledge of it do you think that his life is a dream or a waking?
Just consider.
Is not the dream state, whether the man is asleep or awake, just this: the mistaking of resemblance for identity?"
"I should certainly call that dreaming," he said.
"Well, then, take the opposite case: the man whose thought recognizes a beauty in itself, and is able to distinguish that self-beautiful and the things that participate in it, and neither supposes the participants to be it nor it the participants is his life, in your opinion, a waking or a dream state?"
"He is very much awake," he replied.
"Could we not rightly, then, call the mental state of the one as knowing, knowledge, and that of the other as opining, opinion?"
"Assuredly."
"Suppose, now, he who we say opines but does not know should be angry and challenge our statement as not true.
Can we find any way of soothing him and gently winning him over, without telling him too plainly that he is not in his right mind?"
"We must try," he said.
"Come, then, consider what we are to say to him,
or would you have us question him in this fashion premising that if he knows anything, nobody grudges it him,
but we should be very glad to see him knowing something
but tell us this: Does he who knows know something or nothing?
Do you reply in his behalf."
"I will reply," he said, "that he knows something."
"Is it something that is or is not?"
"That is. How could that which is not be known?"
"We are sufficiently assured of this, then, even if we should examine it from every point of view, that that which entirely 'is' is entirely knowable, and that which in no way 'is' is in every way unknowable."
"Most sufficiently."
"Good. If a thing, then, is so conditioned as both to be and not to be, would it not lie between that which absolutely and unqualifiedly is and that which in no way is?"
"Between."
"Then if knowledge pertains to that which is and ignorance of necessity to that which is not, for that which lies between we must seek for something between nescience and science, if such a thing there be."
"By all means."
"Is there a thing which we call opinion?"
"Surely."
"Is it a different faculty from science or the same?"
"A different."
"Then opinion is set over one thing and science over another, each by virtue of its own distinctive power or faculty."
"That is so."
"May we say, then, that science is naturally related to that which is, to know that and how that which is is?
But rather, before we proceed, I think we must draw the following distinctions."
"What ones?"
"Shall we say that faculties, powers, abilities are a class of entities by virtue of which we and all other things are able to do what we or they are able to do?
I mean that sight and hearing, for example, are faculties, if so be that you understand the class or type that I am trying to describe."
"I understand," he said.
"Hear, then, my notion about them.
In a faculty I cannot see any color or shape or similar mark such as those on which in many other cases I fix my eyes in discriminating in my thought one thing from another.
But in the case of a faculty I look to one thing only that to which it is related and what it effects, and it is in this way that I come to call each one of them a faculty, and that which is related to the same thing and accomplishes the same thing I call the same faculty, and that to another I call other.
How about you, what is your practice?"
"The same," he said.
"To return, then, my friend," said I, "to science or true knowledge, do you say that it is a faculty and a power, or in what class do you put it?"
"Into this," he said, "the most potent of all faculties."
"And opinion shall we assign it to some other class than faculty."
"By no means," he said, "for that by which we are able to opine is nothing else than the faculty of opinion."
"But not long ago you agreed that science and opinion are not identical."
"How could any rational man affirm the identity of the infallible with the fallible?"
"Excellent," said I, "and we are plainly agreed that opinion is a different thing from scientific knowledge."
"Yes, different."
"Each of them, then, since it has a different power, is related to a different object."
"Of necessity."
"Science, I presume, to that which is, to know the condition of that which is. But opinion, we say, opines."
"Yes."
"Does it opine the same thing that science knows, and will the knowable and the opinable be identical, or is that impossible?"
"Impossible by our admissions," he said.
"If different faculties are naturally related to different objects and both opinion and science are faculties, but each different from the other, as we say these admissions do not leave place for the identity of the knowable and the opinable."
"Then, if that which is is knowable, something other than that which is would be the opinable."
"Something else."
"Does it opine that which is not, or is it impossible even to opine that which is not?
Reflect:
Does not he who opines bring his opinion to bear upon something
or shall we reverse ourselves and say that it is possible to opine, yet opine nothing?"
"That is impossible."
"Then he who opines opines some one thing."
"Yes."
"But surely that which is not could not be designated as some one thing, but most rightly as nothing at all.
To that which is not we of necessity assigned nescience, and to that which is, knowledge."
"Rightly," he said.
"Then neither that which is nor that which is not is the object of opinion."
"It seems not."
"Then opinion would be neither nescience nor knowledge."
"So it seems."
"Is it then a faculty outside of these, exceeding either knowledge in lucidity or ignorance in obscurity?"
"It is neither."
"But do you deem opinion something darker than knowledge but brighter than ignorance?"
"Much so," he said.
"And does it lie within the boundaries of the two?"
"Yes."
"Then opinion would be between the two."
"Most assuredly."
"Were we not saying a little while ago that if anything should turn up such that it both is and is not, that sort of thing would lie between that which purely and absolutely is and that which wholly is not, and that the faculty correlated with it would be neither science or nescience, but that which should appear to hold a place correspondingly between nescience and science."
"Right."
"And now there has turned up between these two the thing that we call opinion."
"There has."
"It would remain, then, as it seems, for us to discover that which partakes of both, of to be and not to be, and that could not be rightly designated either in its exclusive purity; so that, if it shall be discovered, we may justly pronounce it to be the opinable, thus assigning extremes to extremes and the intermediate to the intermediate. Is not that so?"
"It is."
"This much premised, let him tell me, I will say, let him answer me, that good fellow who does not think there is a beautiful in itself or any idea of beauty in itself always remaining the same and unchanged, but who does believe in many beautiful things the lover of spectacles, I mean, who cannot endure to hear anybody say that the beautiful is one and the just one, and so of other things and this will be our question:
My good fellow, is there any one of these many fair-and-honorable things that will not sometimes appear ugly and base?
And of the just things, that will not seem unjust?
And of the pious things, that will not seem impious?"
"No, it is inevitable," he said, "that they would appear to be both beautiful in a way and ugly, and so with all the other things you asked about."
"And again, do the many double things appear any the less halves than doubles?"
"None the less."
"And likewise of the great and the small things, the light and the heavy things will they admit these predicates any more than their opposites?"
"No," he said, "each of them will always hold of, partake of, both."
"Then is each of these multiples rather than it is not that which one affirms it to be?"
"They are like those jesters who palter with us in a double sense at banquets," he replied, "and resemble the children's riddle about the eunuch and his hitting of the bat with what and as it sat on what they signify that he struck it.
For these things too equivocate, and it is impossible to conceive firmly any one of them to be or not to be or both or neither."
"Do you know what to do with them, then?" said I, "and can you find a better place to put them than that midway between existence or essence and the not-to-be?
For we shall surely not discover a darker region than not-being that they should still more not be, nor brighter than being that they should still more be."
"Most true," he said.
"We would seem to have found, then, that the many conventions of the many about the fair and honorable and other things are tumbled about in the mid-region between that which is not and that which is in the true and absolute sense."
"We have so found it."
"But we agreed in advance that, if anything of that sort should be discovered, it must be denominated opinable, not knowable, the wanderer between being caught by the faculty that is betwixt and between."
"We did agree."
"We shall affirm, then, that those who view many beautiful things but do not see the beautiful itself and are unable to follow another's guidance to it, and many just things, but not justice itself, and so in all cases we shall say that such men have opinions about all things, but know nothing of the things they opine."
"Of necessity."
"And, on the other hand, what of those who contemplate the very things themselves in each case, ever remaining the same and unchanged
shall we not say that they know and do not merely opine?"
"That, too, necessarily follows."
"Shall we not also say that the one welcomes to his thought and loves the things subject to knowledge and the other those to opinion?
Do we not remember that we said that those loved and regarded tones and beautiful colours and the like, but they could not endure the notion of the reality of the beautiful itself?"
"We do remember."
"Shall we then offend their ears if we call them doxophilists rather than philosophers and will they be very angry if we so speak?"
"Not if they heed my counsel," he said, "for to be angry with truth is not lawful."
"Then to those who in each and every kind welcome the true being, lovers of wisdom and not lovers of opinion is the name we must give."
"By all means."
"So now, Glaucon," I said, "our argument after winding a long and weary way has at last made clear to us who are the philosophers or lovers of wisdom and who are not."
"Yes," he said, "a shorter way is perhaps not feasible."
"Apparently not," I said.
"I, at any rate, think that the matter would have been made still plainer if we had had nothing but this to speak of, and if there were not so many things left which our purpose of discerning the difference between the just and the unjust life requires us to discuss."
"What, then," he said, "comes next?"
"What else," said I, "but the next in order?
Since the philosophers are those who are capable of apprehending that which is eternal and unchanging, while those who are incapable of this but lose themselves and wander amid the multiplicities of multifarious things, are not philosophers, which of the two kinds ought to be the leaders in a state?"
"What, then," he said, "would be a fair statement of the matter?"
"Whichever," I said, "appear competent to guard the laws and pursuits of society, these we should establish as guardians."
"Right" he said.
"Is this, then," said I, "clear, whether the guardian who is to keep watch over anything ought to be blind or keen of sight?"
"Of course it is clear," he said.
"Do you think, then, that there is any appreciable difference between the blind and those who are veritably deprived of the knowledge of the veritable being of things, those who have no vivid pattern in their souls
and so cannot, as painters look to their models, fix their eyes on the absolute truth, and always with reference to that ideal and in the exactest possible contemplation of it establish in this world also the laws of the beautiful, the just and the good, when that is needful, or guard and preserve those that are established?"
"No, by heaven," he said, "there is not much difference."
"Shall we, then, appoint these blind souls as our guardians, rather than those who have learned to know the ideal reality of things and who do not fall short of the others in experience and are not second to them in any part of virtue?"
"It would be strange indeed," he said, "to choose others than the philosophers, provided they were not deficient in those other respects, for this very knowledge of the ideal would perhaps be the greatest of superiorities."
"Then what we have to say is how it would be possible for the same persons to have both qualifications, is it not?"
"Quite so."
"Then, as we were saying at the beginning of this discussion, the first thing to understand is the nature that they must have from birth; and I think that if we sufficiently agree on this we shall also agree that the combination of qualities that we seek belongs to the same persons, and that we need no others for guardians of states than these."
"How so?"
"We must accept as agreed this trait of the philosophical nature, that it is ever enamored of the kind of knowledge which reveals to them something of that essence which is eternal, and is not wandering between the two poles of generation and decay."
"Let us take that as agreed."
"And, further," said I, "that their desire is for the whole of it and that they do not willingly renounce a small or a great, a more precious or a less honored, part of it.
That was the point of our former illustration drawn from lovers and men covetous of honor."
"You are right," he said.
"Consider, then, next whether the men who are to meet our requirements must not have this further quality in their natures."
"What quality?"
"The spirit of truthfulness, reluctance to admit falsehood in any form, the hatred of it and the love of truth."
"It is likely," he said.
"It is not only likely, my friend, but there is every necessity that he who is by nature enamored of anything should cherish all that is akin and pertaining to the object of his love."
"Right," he said.
"Could you find anything more akin to wisdom than truth?"
"Impossible," he said.
"Then can the same nature be a lover of wisdom and of falsehood?"
"By no means."
"Then the true lover of knowledge must, from childhood up, be most of all a striver after truth in every form."
"By all means."
"But, again, we surely are aware that when in a man the desires incline strongly to any one thing, they are weakened for other things.
It is as if the stream had been diverted into another channel.
"Surely."
"So, when a man's desires have been taught to flow in the channel of learning and all that sort of thing, they will be concerned, I presume, with the pleasures of the soul in itself, and will be indifferent to those of which the body is the instrument, if the man is a true and not a sham philosopher."
"That is quite necessary."
"Such a man will be temperate and by no means greedy for wealth; for the things for the sake of which money and great expenditure are eagerly sought others may take seriously, but not he."
"It is so."
"And there is this further point to be considered in distinguishing the philosophical from the unphilosophical nature."
"What point?"
"You must not overlook any touch of illiberality.
For nothing can be more contrary than such pettiness to the quality of a soul that is ever to seek integrity and wholeness in all things human and divine."
"Most true," he said.
"Do you think that a mind habituated to thoughts of grandeur and the contemplation of all time and all existence can deem this life of man a thing of great concern?"
"Impossible," said he.
"Hence such a man will not suppose death to be terrible?"
"Least of all."
"Then a cowardly and illiberal spirit, it seems, could have no part in genuine philosophy."
"I think not."
"What then? Could a man of orderly spirit, not a lover of money, not illiberal, nor a braggart nor a coward, ever prove unjust, or a driver of hard bargains?"
"Impossible."
"This too, then, is a point that in your discrimination of the philosophic and unphilosophic soul you will observe whether the man is from youth up just and gentle or unsocial and savage."
"Assuredly."
"Nor will you overlook this, I fancy."
"What?"
"Whether he is quick or slow to learn.
Or do you suppose that anyone could properly love a task which he performed painfully and with little result from much toil?"
"That could not be."
"And if he could not keep what he learned, being steeped in oblivion, could he fail to be void of knowledge?"
"How could he?"
"And so, having all his labor for naught, will he not finally be constrained to loathe himself and that occupation?"
"Of course."
"The forgetful soul, then, we must not list in the roll of competent lovers of wisdom, but we require a good memory."
"By all means."
"But assuredly we should not say that the want of harmony and seemliness in a nature conduces to anything else than the want of measure and proportion."
"Certainly."
"And do you think that truth is akin to measure and proportion or to disproportion?"
"To proportion."
"Then in addition to our other requirements we look for a mind endowed with measure and grace, whose native disposition will make it easily guided to the aspect of the ideal reality in all things."
"Assuredly."
"Tell me, then: Have we not proved the qualities enumerated to be necessary and compatible with one another for the soul that is to have a sufficient and perfect apprehension of reality?"
"Nay, most necessary," he said.
"Is there any fault, then, that you can find with a pursuit which a man could not properly practise unless he were by nature of good memory, quick apprehension, magnificent, gracious, friendly and akin to truth, justice, bravery and sobriety?"
"Momus himself," he said, "could not find fault with such a combination."
"Well, then," said I, "when men of this sort are perfected by education and maturity of age, would you not entrust the state solely to them?"
And Adeimantus said, "No one, Socrates, would be able to controvert these statements of yours.
But, all the same, those who occasionally hear you argue thus feel in this way:
They think that owing to their inexperience in the game of question and answer they are at every question led astray a little bit by the argument,
and when these bits are accumulated at the conclusion of the discussion mighty is their fall and the apparent contradiction of what they at first said;
and that just as by expert draught-players the unskilled are finally shut in and cannot make a move,
so they are finally blocked and have their mouths stopped by this other game of draughts played not with counters but with words;
yet the truth is not affected by that outcome.
I say this with reference to the present case,
for in this instance one might say that he is unable in words to contend against you at each question, but that when it comes to facts he sees that of those who turn to philosophy, not merely touching upon it to complete their education and dropping it while still young, but lingering too long in the study of it, the majority become cranks, not to say rascals, and those accounted the finest spirits among them are still rendered useless to society by the pursuit which you commend."
And I, on hearing this, said, "Do you think that they are mistaken in saying so?"
"I don't know," said he, "but I would gladly hear your opinion."
"You may hear, then, that I think that what they say is true."
"How, then," he replied, "can it be right to say that our cities will never be freed from their evils until the philosophers, whom we admit to be useless to them, become their rulers?"
"Your question," I said, "requires an answer expressed in a comparison or parable."
"And you," he said, "of course, are not accustomed to speak in comparisons!"
"So," said I, "you are making fun of me after driving me into such an impasse of argument.
But, all the same, hear my comparison so that you may still better see how I strain after imagery.
For so cruel is the condition of the better sort in relation to the state that there is no single thing like it in nature.
But to find a likeness for it and a defence for them one must bring together many things in such a combination as painters mix when they portray goat-stags and similar creatures.
Conceive this sort of thing happening either on many ships or on one:
Picture a shipmaster in height and strength surpassing all others on the ship, but who is slightly deaf and of similarly impaired vision, and whose knowledge of navigation is on a par with his sight and hearing.
Conceive the sailors to be wrangling with one another for control of the helm, each claiming that it is his right to steer though he has never learned the art and cannot point out his teacher or any time when he studied it.
And what is more, they affirm that it cannot be taught at all,
but they are ready to make mincemeat of anyone who says that it can be taught,
and meanwhile they are always clustered about the shipmaster importuning him and sticking at nothing to induce him to turn over the helm to them.
And sometimes, if they fail and others get his ear,
they put the others to death or cast them out from the ship,
and then, after binding and stupefying the worthy shipmaster with mandragora or intoxication or otherwise, they take command of the ship, consume its stores and, drinking and feasting, make such a voyage of it as is to be expected from such,
and as if that were not enough, they praise and celebrate as a navigator, a pilot, a master of shipcraft, the man who is most cunning to lend a hand in persuading or constraining the shipmaster to let them rule, while the man who lacks this craft they censure as useless.
They have no suspicions that the true pilot must give his attention to the time of the year, the seasons, the sky, the winds, the stars, and all that pertains to his art if he is to be a true ruler of a ship, and that he does not believe that there is any art or science of seizing the helm with or without the consent of others, or any possibility of mastering this alleged art and the practice of it at the same time with the science of navigation.
With such goings-on aboard ship do you not think that the real pilot would in very deed be called a star-gazer, an idle babbler, a useless fellow, by the sailors in ships managed after this fashion?"
"Quite so," said Adeimantus.
"You take my meaning, I presume, and do not require us to put the comparison to the proof and show that the condition we have described is the exact counterpart of the relation of the state to the true philosophers."
"It is indeed," he said.
"To begin with, then, teach this parable to the man who is surprised that philosophers are not honored in our cities, and try to convince him that it would be far more surprising if they were honored."
"I will teach him," he said.
"And say to him further: You are right in affirming that the finest spirit among the philosophers are of no service to the multitude.
But bid him blame for this uselessness, not the finer spirits, but those who do not know how to make use of them.
For it is not the natural course of things that the pilot should beg the sailors to be ruled by him or that wise men should go to the doors of the rich.
The author of that epigram was a liar.
But the true nature of things is that whether the sick man be rich or poor he must needs go to the door of the physician, and everyone who needs to be governed to the door of the man who knows how to govern, not that the ruler should implore his natural subjects to let themselves be ruled, if he is really good for anything.
But you will make no mistake in likening our present political rulers to the sort of sailors we are just describing, and those whom these call useless and star-gazing ideologists to the true pilots."
"Just so," he said.
"Hence, and under these conditions, we cannot expect that the noblest pursuit should be highly esteemed by those whose way of life is quite the contrary.
But far the greatest and chief disparagement of philosophy is brought upon it by the pretenders to that way of life, those whom you had in mind when you affirmed that the accuser of philosophy says that the majority of her followers are rascals and the better sort useless, while I admitted that what you said was true. Is not that so?"
"Yes."
"Have we not, then, explained the cause of the uselessness of the better sort?"
"We have."
"Shall we next set forth the inevitableness of the degeneracy of the majority, and try to show if we can that philosophy is not to be blamed for this either?"
"By all means."
"Let us begin, then, what we have to say and hear by recalling the starting-point of our description of the nature which he who is to be a scholar and gentleman must have from birth.
The leader of the choir for him, if you recollect, was truth. That he was to seek always and altogether, on pain of being an impostor without part or lot in true philosophy."
"Yes, that was said."
"Is not this one point quite contrary to the prevailing opinion about him?"
"It is indeed," he said.
"Will it not be a fair plea in his defence to say that it was the nature of the real lover of knowledge to strive emulously for true being and that he would not linger over the many particulars that are opined to be real, but would hold on his way,
and the edge of his passion would not be blunted nor would his desire fail till he came into touch with the nature of each thing in itself by that part of his soul to which it belongs to lay hold on that kind of reality the part akin to it, namely and through that approaching it, and consorting with reality really,
he would beget intelligence and truth, attain to knowledge and truly live and grow, and so find surcease from his travail of soul, but not before?"
"Well, then, will such a man love falsehood, or, quite the contrary, hate it?"
"Hate it," he said.
"When truth led the way, no choir of evils, we, I fancy, would say, could ever follow in its train."
"How could it?"
"But rather a sound and just character, which is accompanied by temperance."
"Right," he said.
"What need, then, of repeating from the beginning our proof of the necessary order of the choir that attends on the philosophical nature?
You surely remember that we found pertaining to such a nature courage, grandeur of soul, aptness to learn, memory.
And when you interposed the objection that though everybody will be compelled to admit our statements,
yet, if we abandoned mere words and fixed our eyes on the persons to whom the words referred, everyone would say that he actually saw some of them to be useless and most of them base with all baseness,
it was in our search for the cause of this ill-repute that we came to the present question:
Why is it that the majority are bad?
And, for the sake of this, we took up again the nature of the true philosophers and defined what it must necessarily be?"
"That is so," he said.
"We have, then," I said, "to contemplate the causes of the corruption of this nature in the majority,
while a small part escapes, even those whom men call not bad but useless;
and after that in turn we are to observe those who imitate this nature and usurp its pursuits and see what types of souls they are that thus entering upon a way of life which is too high for them and exceeds their powers, by the many discords and disharmonies of their conduct everywhere and among all men bring upon philosophy the repute of which you speak."
"Of what corruptions are you speaking?"
"I will try," I said, "to explain them to you if I can.
I think everyone will grant us this point, that a nature such as we just now postulated for the perfect philosopher is a rare growth among men and is found in only a few. Don't you think so?"
"Most emphatically."
"Observe, then, the number and magnitude of the things that operate to destroy these few."
"What are they?"
"The most surprising fact of all is that each of the gifts of nature which we praise tends to corrupt the soul of its possessor and divert it from philosophy.
I am speaking of bravery, sobriety, and the entire list."
"That does sound like a paradox," said he.
"Furthermore," said I, "all the so-called goods corrupt and divert, beauty and wealth and strength of body and powerful family connections in the city and all things akin to them you get my general meaning?"
"I do," he said, "and I would gladly hear a more precise statement of it."
"Well," said I, "grasp it rightly as a general proposition and the matter will be clear and the preceding statement will not seem to you so strange."
"How do you bid me proceed?" he said.
"We know it to be universally true of every seed and growth, whether vegetable or animal, that the more vigorous it is the more it falls short of its proper perfection when deprived of the food, the season, the place that suits it.
For evil is more opposed to the good than to the not-good.
"Of course."
"So it is, I take it, natural that the best nature should fare worse than the inferior under conditions of nurture unsuited to it."
"It is."
"Then," said I, "Adeimantus, shall we not similarly affirm that the best endowed souls become worse than the others under a bad education?
Or do you suppose that great crimes and unmixed wickedness spring from a slight nature and not from a vigorous one corrupted by its nurture, while a weak nature will never be the cause of anything great, either for good or evil?"
"No," he said, "that is the case."
"Then the nature which we assumed in the philosopher, if it receives the proper teaching, must needs grow and attain to consummate excellence, but, if it be sown and planted and grown in the wrong environment, the outcome will be quite the contrary unless some god comes to the rescue.
Or are you too one of the multitude who believe that there are young men who are corrupted by the sophists, and that there are sophists in private life who corrupt to any extent worth mentioning, and that it is not rather the very men who talk in this strain who are the chief sophists and educate most effectively and mould to their own heart's desire young and old, men and women?"
"When?"
said he.
"Why, when," I said, "the multitude are seated together in assemblies or in court-rooms or theaters or camps or any other public gathering of a crowd, and with loud uproar censure some of the things that are said and done and approve others, both in excess, with full-throated clamor and clapping of hands, and thereto the rocks and the region round about re-echoing redouble the din of the censure and the praise.
In such case how do you think the young man's heart, as the saying is, is moved within him?
What private teaching do you think will hold out and not rather be swept away by the torrent of censure and applause, and borne off on its current, so that he will affirm the same things that they do to be honorable and base, and will do as they do, and be even such as they?"
"That is quite inevitable, Socrates," he said.
"And, moreover," I said, "we have not yet mentioned the chief necessity and compulsion."
"What is it?"
said he.
"That which these 'educators' and sophists impose by action when their words fail to convince.
Don't you know that they chastise the recalcitrant with loss of civic rights and fines and death?"
"They most emphatically do," he said.
"What other sophist, then, or what private teaching do you think will prevail in opposition to these?"
"None, I fancy," said he.
"No," said I, "the very attempt is the height of folly.
For there is not, never has been and never will be, a divergent type of character and virtue created by an education running counter to theirs humanly speaking, I mean, my friend;
for the divine, as the proverb says, all rules fail.
And you may be sure that, if anything is saved and turns out well in the present condition of society and government, in saying that the providence of God preserves it you will not be speaking ill."
"Neither do I think otherwise," he said.
"Then," said I, "think this also in addition."
"What?"
"Each of these private teachers who work for pay, whom the politicians call sophists and regard as their rivals, inculcates nothing else than these opinions of the multitude which they opine when they are assembled and calls this knowledge wisdom.
It is as if a man were acquiring the knowledge of the humors and desires of a great strong beast which he had in his keeping, how it is to be approached and touched, and when and by what things it is made most savage or gentle, yes, and the several sounds it is wont to utter on the occasion of each, and again what sounds uttered by another make it tame or fierce,
and after mastering this knowledge by living with the creature and by lapse of time should call it wisdom, and should construct thereof a system and art and turn to the teaching of it, knowing nothing in reality about which of these opinions and desires is honorable or base, good or evil, just or unjust,
but should apply all these terms to the judgements of the great beast, calling the things that pleased it good, and the things that vexed it bad, having no other account to render of them, but should call what is necessary just and honorable, never having observed how great is the real difference between the necessary and the good, and being incapable of explaining it to another.
Do you not think, by heaven, that such a one would be a strange educator?"
"I do," he said.
"Do you suppose that there is any difference between such a one and the man who thinks that it is wisdom to have learned to know the moods and the pleasures of the motley multitude in their assembly, whether about painting or music or, for that matter, politics?
For if a man associates with these and offers and exhibits to them his poetry or any other product of his craft or any political service, and grants the mob authority over himself more than is unavoidable, the proverbial necessity of Diomede will compel him to give the public what it likes, but that what it likes is really good and honorable, have you ever heard an attempted proof of this that is not simply ridiculous?"
"No," he said, "and I fancy I never shall hear it either."
"Bearing all this in mind, recall our former question.
Can the multitude possibly tolerate or believe in the reality of the beautiful in itself as opposed to the multiplicity of beautiful things, or can they believe in anything conceived in its essence as opposed to the many particulars?"
"Not in the least," he said.
"Philosophy, then, the love of wisdom, is impossible for the multitude."
"Impossible."
"It is inevitable, then, that those who philosophize should be censured by them."
"Inevitable."
"And so likewise by those laymen who, associating with the mob, desire to curry favor with it."
"Obviously."
"From this point of view do you see any salvation that will suffer the born philosopher to abide in the pursuit and persevere to the end?
Consider it in the light of what we said before.
We agreed that quickness in learning, memory, courage and magnificence were the traits of this nature."
"Yes."
"Then even as a boy among boys such a one will take the lead in all things, especially if the nature of his body matches the soul."
"How could he fail to do so?"
he said.
"His kinsmen and fellow-citizens, then, will desire, I presume, to make use of him when he is older for their own affairs."
"Of course."
"Then they will fawn upon him with petitions and honors, anticipating and flattering the power that will be his."
"That certainly is the usual way."
"How, then, do you think such a youth will behave in such conditions, especially if it happen that he belongs to a great city and is rich and well-born therein, and thereto handsome and tall?
Will his soul not be filled with unbounded ambitious hopes, and will he not think himself capable of managing the affairs of both Greeks and barbarians, and thereupon exalt himself, haughty of mien and stuffed with empty pride and void of sense
"He surely will," he said.
"And if to a man in this state of mind someone gently comes and tells him what is the truth, that he has no sense and sorely needs it, and that the only way to get it is to work like a slave to win it, do you think it will be easy for him to lend an ear to the quiet voice in the midst of and in spite of these evil surroundings
"Far from it," said he.
"And even supposing," said I, "that owing to a fortunate disposition and his affinity for the words of admonition one such youth apprehends something and is moved and drawn towards philosophy, what do we suppose will be the conduct of those who think that they are losing his service and fellowship?
Is there any word or deed that they will stick at to keep him from being persuaded and to incapacitate anyone who attempts it, both by private intrigue and public prosecution in the court?"
"That is inevitable," he said.
"Is there any possibility of such a one continuing to philosophize?"
"None at all," he said.
"Do you see, then," said I," that we were not wrong in saying that the very qualities that make up the philosophical nature do, in fact, become, when the environment and nurture are bad, in some sort the cause of its backsliding, and so do the so-called goods riches and all such instrumentalities?"
"No," he replied, "it was rightly said."
"Such, my good friend, and so great as regards the noblest pursuit, is the destruction and corruption of the most excellent nature, which is rare enough in any case, as we affirm.
And it is from men of this type that those spring who do the greatest harm to communities and individuals, and the greatest good when the stream chances to be turned into that channel, but a small nature never does anything great to a man or a city."
"Most true," said he.
"Those, then, to whom she properly belongs, thus falling away and leaving philosophy forlorn and unwedded, themselves live an unreal and alien life, while other unworthy wooers rush in and defile her as an orphan bereft of her kin, and attach to her such reproaches as you say her revilers taunt her with, declaring that some of her consorts are of no account and the many accountable for many evils."
"Why, yes," he replied, "that is what they do say."
"And plausibly," said I;
"for other mannikins, observing that the place is unoccupied and full of fine terms and pretensions, just as men escape from prison to take sanctuary in temples, so these gentlemen joyously bound away from the mechanical arts to philosophy, those that are most cunning in their little craft.
For in comparison with the other arts the prestige of philosophy even in her present low estate retains a superior dignity; and this is the ambition and aspiration of that multitude of pretenders unfit by nature, whose souls are bowed and mutilated by their vulgar occupations even as their bodies are marred by their arts and crafts. Is not that inevitable?"
"Quite so," he said.
"Is not the picture which they present," I said, "precisely that of a little bald-headed tinker who has made money and just been freed from bonds and had a bath and is wearing a new garment and has got himself up like a bridegroom and is about to marry his master's daughter who has fallen into poverty and abandonment?"
"There is no difference at all," he said.
"Of what sort will probably be the offspring of such parents?"
"Will they not be bastard and base?"
"Inevitably."
"And so when men unfit for culture approach philosophy and consort with her unworthily, what sort of ideas and opinions shall we say they beget?
Will they not produce what may in very deed be fairly called sophisms, and nothing that is genuine or that partakes of true intelligence?"
"Quite so," he said.
"There is a very small remnant, then, Adeimantus," I said, "of those who consort worthily with philosophy, some well-born and well-bred nature, it may be, held in check by exile, and so in the absence of corrupters remaining true to philosophy, as its quality bids,
or it may happen that a great soul born in a little town scorns and disregards its parochial affairs;
and a small group perhaps might by natural affinity be drawn to it from other arts which they justly disdain;
and the bridle of our companion Theages also might operate as a restraint.
For in the case of Theages all other conditions were at hand for his backsliding from philosophy,
but his sickly habit of body keeping him out of politics holds him back.
My own case, the divine sign, is hardly worth mentioning
for I suppose it has happened to few or none before me.
And those who have been of this little company and have tasted the sweetness and blessedness of this possession and who have also come to understand the madness of the multitude sufficiently and have seen that there is nothing, if I may say so, sound or right in any present politics, and that there is no ally with whose aid the champion of justice could escape destruction,
but that he would be as a man who has fallen among wild beasts, unwilling to share their misdeeds and unable to hold out singly against the savagery of all, and that he would thus, before he could in any way benefit his friends or the state come to an untimely end without doing any good to himself or others,
for all these reasons I say the philosopher remains quiet, minds his own affair, and, as it were, standing aside under shelter of a wall in a storm and blast of dust and sleet and seeing others filled full of lawlessness, is content if in any way he may keep himself free from iniquity and unholy deeds through this life and take his departure with fair hope, serene and well content when the end comes."
"Well," he said, "that is no very slight thing to have achieved before taking his departure."
"He would not have accomplished any very great thing either," I replied, "if it were not his fortune to live in a state adapted to his nature.
In such a state only will he himself rather attain his full stature and together with his own preserve the common weal.
"The causes and the injustice of the calumniation of philosophy, I think, have been fairly set forth, unless you have something to add."
"No," he said, "I have nothing further to offer on that point.
But which of our present governments do you think is suitable for philosophy?"
"None whatever," I said; "but the very ground of my complaint is that no polity of today is worthy of the philosophic nature.
This is just the cause of its perversion and alteration;
as a foreign seed sown in an alien soil is wont to be overcome and die out into the native growth, so this kind does not preserve its own quality but falls away and degenerates into an alien type.
But if ever it finds the best polity as it itself is the best, then will it be apparent that this was in truth divine and all the others human in their natures and practices.
Obviously then you are next, going to ask what is this best form of government."
"Wrong," he said "I was going to ask not that but whether it is this one that we have described in our establishment of a state or another."
"In other respects it is this one," said I; "but there is one special further point that we mentioned even then, namely that there would always have to be resident in such a state an element having the same conception of its constitution that you the lawgiver had in framing its laws."
"That was said," he replied.
"But it was not sufficiently explained," I said, "from fear of those objections on your part which have shown that the demonstration of it is long and difficult.
And apart from that the remainder of the exposition is by no means easy."
"Just what do you mean?"
"The manner in which a state that occupies itself with philosophy can escape destruction.
For all great things are precarious and, as the proverb truly says, fine things are hard."
"All the same," he said, "our exposition must be completed by making this plain."
"It will be no lack of will," I said, "but if anything, a lack of ability, that would prevent that.
But you shall observe for yourself my zeal.
And note again how zealously and recklessly I am prepared to say that the state ought to take up this pursuit in just the reverse of our present fashion."
"In what way?"
"At present," said I, "those who do take it up are youths, just out of boyhood, who in the interval before they engage in business and money-making approach the most difficult part of it, and then drop it and these are regarded forsooth as the best exemplars of philosophy.
By the most difficult part I mean discussion.
In later life they think they have done much if, when invited, they deign to listen to the philosophic discussions of others.
That sort of thing they think should be by-work.
And towards old age, with few exceptions, their light is quenched more completely than the sun of Heracleitus, inasmuch as it is never rekindled."
"And what should they do?"
he said.
"Just the reverse.
While they are lads and boys they should occupy themselves with an education and a culture suitable to youth, and while their bodies are growing to manhood take right good care of them, thus securing a basis and a support for the intellectual life.
But with the advance of age, when the soul begins to attain its maturity, they should make its exercises more severe, and when the bodily strength declines and they are past the age of political and military service, then at last they should be given free range of the pasture and do nothing but philosophize, except incidentally, if they are to live happily,
and, when the end has come, crown the life they have lived with a consonant destiny in that other world."
"You really seem to be very much in earnest, Socrates," he said;
yet I think most of your hearers are even more earnest in their opposition and will not be in the least convinced, beginning with Thrasymachus."
"Do not try to breed a quarrel between me and Thrasymachus, who have just become friends and were not enemies before either.
For we will spare no effort until we either convince him and the rest or achieve something that will profit them when they come to that life in which they will be born gain and meet with such discussions as these."
"A brief time your forecast contemplates," he said.
"Nay, nothing at all," I replied, "as compared with eternity.
However, the unwillingness of the multitude to believe what you say is nothing surprising.
For of the thing here spoken they have never beheld a token, but only the forced and artificial chiming of word and phrase, not spontaneous and accidental as has happened here.
But the figure of a man 'equilibrated' and 'assimilated' to virtue's self perfectly, so far as may be, in word and deed, and holding rule in a city of like quality, that is a thing they have never seen in one case or in many. Do you think they have?"
"By no means."
"Neither, my dear fellow, have they ever seriously inclined to hearken to fair and free discussions whose sole endeavor was to search out the truth at any cost for knowledge's sake, and which dwell apart and salute from afar all the subtleties and cavils that lead to naught but opinion and strife in court-room and in private talk."
"They have not," he said.
"For this cause and foreseeing this, we then despite our fears declared under compulsion of the truth that neither city nor polity nor man either will ever be perfected until some chance compels this uncorrupted remnant of philosophers, who now bear the stigma of uselessness, to take charge of the state whether they wish it or not, and constrains the citizens to obey them,
or else until by some divine inspiration a genuine passion for true philosophy takes possession either of the sons of the men now in power and sovereignty or of themselves.
To affirm that either or both of these things cannot possibly come to pass is, I say, quite unreasonable.
Only in that case could we be justly ridiculed as uttering things as futile as day-dreams are. Is not that so?"
"It is."
"If, then, the best philosophical natures have ever been constrained to take charge of the state in infinite time past, or now are in some barbaric region far beyond our ken, or shall hereafter be, we are prepared to maintain our contention that the constitution we have described has been, is, or will be realized when this philosophic Muse has taken control of the state.
It is not a thing impossible to happen, nor are we speaking of impossibilities.
That it is difficult we too admit."
"I also think so," he said.
"But the multitude are you going to say? does not think so," said I.
"That may be," he said.
"My dear fellow," said I, "do not thus absolutely condemn the multitude.
They will surely be of another mind if in no spirit of contention but soothingly and endeavoring to do away with the dispraise of learning you point out to them whom you mean by philosophers, and define as we recently did their nature and their pursuits so that the people may not suppose you to mean those of whom they are thinking.
Or even if they do look at them in that way, are you still going to deny that they will change their opinion and answer differently?
Or do you think that anyone is ungentle to the gentle or grudging to the ungrudging if he himself is ungrudging and mild?
I will anticipate you and reply that I think that only in some few and not in the mass of mankind is so ungentle or harsh a temper to be found."
"And I, you may be assured," he said, "concur."
"And do you not also concur in this very point that the blame for this harsh attitude of the many towards philosophy falls on that riotous crew who have burst in where they do not belong, wrangling with one another, filled with spite and always talking about persons, a thing least befitting philosophy?"
"Least of all, indeed," he said.
"For surely, Adeimantus, the man whose mind is truly fixed on eternal realities has no leisure to turn his eyes downward upon the petty affairs of men, and so engaging in strife with them to be filled with envy and hate,
but he fixes his gaze upon the things of the eternal and unchanging order, and seeing that they neither wrong nor are wronged by one another,
but all abide in harmony as reason bids, he will endeavor to imitate them and, as far as may be, to fashion himself in their likeness and assimilate himself to them.
Or do you think it possible not to imitate the things to which anyone attaches himself with admiration?"
"Impossible," he said.
"Then the lover of wisdom associating with the divine order will himself become orderly and divine in the measure permitted to man.
But calumny is plentiful everywhere."
"Yes, truly."
"If, then," I said, "some compulsion is laid upon him to practise stamping on the plastic matter of human nature in public and private the patterns that he visions there, and not merely to mould and fashion himself, do you think he will prove a poor craftsman of sobriety and justice and all forms of ordinary civic virtue?"
"By no means," he said.
"But if the multitude become aware that what we are saying of the philosopher is true, will they still be harsh with philosophers, and will they distrust our statement that no city could ever be blessed unless its lineaments were traced by artists who used the heavenly model?"
"They will not be harsh," he said, "if they perceive that.
But tell me, what is the manner of that sketch you have in mind?"
"They will take the city and the characters of men, as they might a tablet, and first wipe it clean no easy task.
But at any rate you know that this would be their first point of difference from ordinary reformers, that they would refuse to take in hand either individual or state or to legislate before they either received a clean slate or themselves made it clean."
"And they would be right," he said.
"And thereafter, do you not think that they would sketch the figure of the constitution?"
"Surely."
"And then, I take it, in the course of the work they would glance frequently in either direction, at justice, beauty, sobriety and the like as they are in the nature of things, and alternately at that which they were trying to reproduce in mankind, mingling and blending from various pursuits that hue of the flesh, so to speak, deriving their judgement from that likeness of humanity which Homer too called when it appeared in men the image and likeness of God."
"Right," he said.
"And they would erase one touch or stroke and paint in another until in the measure of the possible they had made the characters of men pleasing and dear to God as may be."
"That at any rate would be the fairest painting."
"Are we then making any impression on those who you said were advancing to attack us with might and main?
Can we convince them that such a political artist of character and such a painter exists as the one we then were praising when our proposal to entrust the state to him angered them, and are they now in a gentler mood when they hear what we are now saying?"
"Much gentler," he said, "if they are reasonable."
"How can they controvert it?
Will they deny that the lovers of wisdom are lovers of reality and truth?"
"That would be monstrous," he said.
"Or that their nature as we have portrayed it is akin to the highest and best?"
"Not that either."
"Well, then, can they deny that such a nature bred in the pursuits that befit it will be perfectly good and philosophic so far as that can be said of anyone?
Or will they rather say it of those whom we have excluded?"
"Surely not."
"Will they, then, any longer be fierce with us when we declare that, until the philosophic class wins control, there will be no surcease of trouble for city or citizens nor will the polity which we fable in words be brought to pass in deed?"
"They will perhaps be less so," he said.
"Instead of less so, may we not say that they have been altogether tamed and convinced, so that for very shame, if for no other reason, they may assent?"
"Certainly," said he.
"Let us assume, then," said I, "that they are won over to this view.
Will anyone contend that there is no chance that the offspring of kings and rulers should be born with the philosophic nature?"
"Not one," he said.
"And can anyone prove that if so born they must necessarily be corrupted?
The difficulty of their salvation we too concede;
but that in all the course of time not one of all could be saved, will anyone maintain that?"
"How could he?"
"But surely," said I, "the occurrence of one such is enough, if he has a state which obeys him, to realize all that now seems so incredible."
"Yes, one is enough," he said.
"For if such a ruler," I said, "ordains the laws and institutions that we have described it is surely not impossible that the citizens should be content to carry them out."
"By no means."
"Would it, then, be at all strange or impossible for others to come to the opinion to which we have come?"
"I think not," said he.
"And further that these things are best, if possible, has already, I take it, been sufficiently shown."
"Yes, sufficiently."
"Our present opinion, then, about this legislation is that our plan would be best if it could be realized and that this realization is difficult yet not impossible."
"That is the conclusion," he said.
"This difficulty disposed of, we have next to speak of what remains, in what way, namely, and as a result of what studies and pursuits, these preservers of the constitution will form a part of our state, and at what ages they will severally take up each study."
"Yes, we have to speak of that," he said.
"I gained nothing," I said, "by my cunning in omitting heretofore the distasteful topic of the possession of women and procreation of children and the appointment of rulers, because I knew that the absolutely true and right way would provoke censure and is difficult of realization; for now I am none the less compelled to discuss them.
The matter of the women and children has been disposed of, but the education of the rulers has to be examined again, I may say, from the starting-point.
We were saying, if you recollect, that they must approve themselves lovers of the state when tested in pleasures and pains, and make it apparent that they do not abandon this fixed faith under stress of labors or fears or any other vicissitude, and that anyone who could not keep that faith must he rejected, while he who always issued from the test pure and intact, like gold tried in the fire, is to be established as ruler and to receive honors in life and after death and prizes as well.
Something of this sort we said while the argument slipped by with veiled face in fear of starting our present debate."
"Most true," he said; "I remember."
"We shrank, my friend," I said, "from uttering the audacities which have now been hazarded.
But now let us find courage for the definitive pronouncement that as the most perfect guardians we must establish philosophers."
"Yes, assume it to have been said," said he.
"Note, then, that they will naturally be few,
for the different components of the nature which we said their education presupposed rarely consent to grow in one; but for the most part these qualities are found apart."
"What do you mean?" he said.
"Facility in learning, memory, sagacity, quickness of apprehension and their accompaniments, and youthful spirit and magnificence in soul are qualities, you know, that are rarely combined in human nature with a disposition to live orderly, quiet, and stable lives; but such men, by reason of their quickness, are driven about just as chance directs, and all steadfastness is gone out of them."
"You speak truly," he said.
"And on the other hand, the steadfast and stable temperaments, whom one could rather trust in use, and who in war are not easily moved and aroused to fear, are apt to act in the same way when confronted with studies.
They are not easily aroused, learn with difficulty, as if benumbed, and are filled with sleep and yawning when an intellectual task is set them."
"It is so," he said.
"But we affirmed that a man must partake of both temperaments in due and fair combination or else participate in neither the highest education nor in honors nor in rule."
"And rightly," he said.
"Do you not think, then, that such a blend will be a rare thing?"
"Of course."
"They must, then, be tested in the toils and fears and pleasures of which we then spoke, and we have also now to speak of a point we then passed by, that we must exercise them in many studies, watching them to see whether their nature is capable of enduring the greatest and most difficult studies or whether it will faint and flinch as men flinch in the trials and contests of the body."
"That is certainly the right way of looking at it," he said.
"But what do you understand by the greatest studies?"
"You remember, I presume," said I, "that after distinguishing three kinds in the soul, we established definitions of justice, sobriety, bravery and wisdom severally."
"If I did not remember," he said, "I should not deserve to hear the rest."
"Do you also remember what was said before this?"
"What?"
"We were saying, I believe, that for the most perfect discernment of these things another longer way was requisite which would make them plain to one who took it, but that it was possible to add proofs on a par with the preceding discussion.
And you said that that was sufficient, and it was on this understanding that what we then said was said, falling short of ultimate precision as it appeared to me, but if it contented you it is for you to say."
"Well," he said, "it was measurably satisfactory to me, and apparently to the rest of the company."
"Nay, my friend," said I, "a measure of such things that in the least degree falls short of reality proves no measure at all.
For nothing that is imperfect is the measure of anything,
though some people sometimes think that they have already done enough and that there is no need of further inquiry."
"Yes, indeed," he said, "many experience this because of their sloth."
"An experience," said I, "that least of all befits the guardians of a state and of its laws."
"That seems likely," he said.
"Then," said I, "such a one must go around the longer way and must labor no less in studies than in the exercises of the body or else, as we were just saying, he will never come to the end of the greatest study and that which most properly belongs to him."
"Why, are not these things the greatest?" said he; "but is there still something greater than justice and the other virtues we described?"
"There is not only something greater," I said, "but of these very things we need not merely to contemplate an outline as now, but we must omit nothing of their most exact elaboration.
Or would it not be absurd to strain every nerve to attain to the utmost precision and clarity of knowledge about other things of trifling moment and not to demand the greatest precision for the greatest matters?"
"It would indeed," he said; "but do you suppose that anyone will let you go without asking what is the greatest study and with what you think it is concerned?"
"By no means," said I; "but do you ask the question.
You certainly have heard it often, but now you either do not apprehend or again you are minded to make trouble for me by attacking the argument.
I suspect it is rather the latter.
For you have often heard that the greatest thing to learn is the idea of good by reference to which just things and all the rest become useful and beneficial.
And now I am almost sure you know that this is what I am going to speak of and to say further that we have no adequate knowledge of it.
And if we do not know it, then, even if without the knowledge of this we should know all other things never so well, you are aware that it would avail us nothing, just as no possession either is of any avail without the possession of the good.
Or do you think there is any profit in possessing everything except that which is good, or in understanding all things else apart from the good while understanding and knowing nothing that is fair and good?"
"No, by Zeus, I do not," he said.
"But, furthermore, you know this too, that the multitude believe pleasure to be the good, and the finer spirits intelligence or knowledge."
"Certainly."
"And you are also aware, my friend, that those who hold this latter view are not able to point out what knowledge it is but are finally compelled to say that it is the knowledge of the good."
"Most absurdly," he said.
"Is it not absurd," said I, "if while taunting us with our ignorance of the good they turn about and talk to us as if we knew it?
For they say it is the knowledge of the good, as if we understood their meaning when they utter the word 'good.'"
"Most true," he said.
"Well, are those who define the good as pleasure infected with any less confusion of thought than the others?
Or are not they in like manner compelled to admit that there are bad pleasures?"
"Most assuredly."
"The outcome is, I take it, that they are admitting the same things to be both good and bad, are they not?"
"Certainly."
"Then is it not apparent that there are many and violent disputes about it?"
"Of course."
"And again, is it not apparent that while in the case of the just and the honorable many would prefer the semblance without the reality in action, possession, and opinion, yet when it comes to the good nobody is content with the possession of the appearance but all men seek the reality, and the semblance satisfies nobody here?"
"Quite so," he said.
"That, then, which every soul pursues and for its sake does all that it does, with an intuition of its reality, but yet baffled and unable to apprehend its nature adequately, or to attain to any stable belief about it as about other things, and for that reason failing of any possible benefit from other things, in a matter of this quality and moment, can we, I ask you, allow a like blindness and obscurity in those best citizens to whose hands we are to entrust all things?"
"Least of all," he said.
"I fancy, at any rate," said I, "that the just and the honorable, if their relation and reference to the good is not known, will not have secured a guardian of much worth in the man thus ignorant, and my surmise is that no one will understand them adequately before he knows this."
"You surmise well," he said.
"Then our constitution will have its perfect and definitive organization only when such a guardian, who knows these things, oversees it."
"Necessarily," he said.
"But you yourself, Socrates, do you think that knowledge is the good or pleasure or something else and different?"
"What a man it is," said I; "you made it very plain long ago that you would not be satisfied with what others think about it."
"Why, it does not seem right to me either, Socrates," he said, "to be ready to state the opinions of others but not one's own when one has occupied himself with the matter so long."
"But then," said I, "do you think it right to speak as having knowledge about things one does not know?"
"By no means," he said, "as having knowledge, but one ought to be willing to tell as his opinion what he opines."
"Nay," said I, "have you not observed that opinions divorced from knowledge are ugly things?
The best of them are blind.
Or do you think that those who hold some true opinion without intelligence differ appreciably from blind men who go the right way?"
"They do not differ at all," he said.
"Is it, then, ugly things that you prefer to contemplate, things blind and crooked, when you might hear from others what is luminous and fair?"
"Nay, in heaven's name, Socrates," said Glaucon, "do not draw back, as it were, at the very goal.
For it will content us if you explain the good even as you set forth the nature of justice, sobriety, and the other virtues."
"It will right well content me, my dear fellow," I said, "but I fear that my powers may fail and that in my eagerness I may cut a sorry figure and become a laughing-stock.
Nay, my beloved, let us dismiss for the time being the nature of the good in itself;
for to attain to my present surmise of that seems a pitch above the impulse that wings my flight today.
But of what seems to be the offspring of the good and most nearly made in its likeness I am willing to speak if you too wish it, and otherwise to let the matter drop."
"Well, speak on," he said, "for you will duly pay me the tale of the parent another time."
"I could wish," I said, "that I were able to make and you to receive the payment and not merely as now the interest.
But at any rate receive this interest and the offspring of the good.
Have a care, however, lest I deceive you unintentionally with a false reckoning of the interest."
"We will do our best," he said, "to be on our guard.
Only speak on."
"Yes," I said, "after first coming to an understanding with you and reminding you of what has been said here before and often on other occasions."
"What?"
said he.
"We predicate 'to be' of many beautiful things and many good things, saying of them severally that they are, and so define them in our speech."
"We do say this."
"And again, we speak of a self-beautiful and of a good that is only and merely good, and so, in the case of all the things that we then posited as many, we turn about and posit each as a single idea or aspect, assuming it to be a unity and call it that which each really is.
"It is so."
"And the one class of things we say can be seen but not thought, while the ideas can be thought but not seen."
"By all means."
"With which of the parts of ourselves, with which of our faculties, then, do we see visible things?"
"With sight," he said.
"And do we not," I said, "hear audibles with hearing, and perceive all sensibles with the other senses?"
"Surely."
"Have you ever observed," said I, "how much the greatest expenditure the creator of the senses has lavished on the faculty of seeing and being seen?
"Why, no, I have not," he said.
"Well, look at it thus.
Do hearing and voice stand in need of another medium so that the one may hear and the other be heard, in the absence of which third element the one will not hear and the other not be heard?"
"They need nothing," he said.
"Neither, I fancy," said I," do many others, not to say that none require anything of the sort.
Or do you know of any?"
"Not I," he said.
"But do you not observe that vision and the visible do have this further need?"
"How?"
"Though vision may be in the eyes and its possessor may try to use it, and though color be present, yet without the presence of a third thing specifically and naturally adapted to this purpose, you are aware that vision will see nothing and the colors will remain invisible."
"What is this thing of which you speak?" he said.
"The thing," I said, "that you call light."
"You say truly," he replied.
"The bond, then, that yokes together visibility and the faculty of sight is more precious by no slight form that which unites the other pairs, if light is not without honor."
"It surely is far from being so," he said.
"Which one can you name of the divinities in heaven as the author and cause of this, whose light makes our vision see best and visible things to be seen?"
"Why, the one that you too and other people mean," he said; "for your question evidently refers to the sun."
"Is not this, then, the relation of vision to that divinity?"
"What?"
"Neither vision itself nor its vehicle, which we call the eye, is identical with the sun."
"Why, no."
"But it is, I think, the most sunlike of all the instruments of sense."
"By far the most."
"And does it not receive the power which it possesses as an influx, as it were, dispensed from the sun?"
"Certainly."
"Is it not also true that the sun is not vision, yet as being the cause thereof is beheld by vision itself?"
"That is so," he said.
"This, then, you must understand that I meant by the offspring of the good which the good begot to stand in a proportion with itself: as the good is in the intelligible region to reason and the objects of reason, so is this in the visible world to vision and the objects of vision."
"How is that?"
he said;
"explain further."
"You are aware," I said, "that when the eyes are no longer turned upon objects upon whose colors the light of day falls but that of the dim luminaries of night, their edge is blunted and they appear almost blind, as if pure vision did not dwell in them."
"Yes, indeed," he said.
"But when, I take it, they are directed upon objects illumined by the sun, they see clearly, and vision appears to reside in these same eyes."
"Certainly."
"Apply this comparison to the soul also in this way.
When it is firmly fixed on the domain where truth and reality shine resplendent it apprehends and knows them and appears to possess reason;
but when it inclines to that region which is mingled with darkness, the world of becoming and passing away, it opines only and its edge is blunted, and it shifts its opinions hither and thither, and again seems as if it lacked reason."
"Yes, it does,"
"This reality, then, that gives their truth to the objects of knowledge and the power of knowing to the knower, you must say is the idea of good,
and you must conceive it as being the cause of knowledge, and of truth in so far as known.
Yet fair as they both are, knowledge and truth, in supposing it to be something fairer still than these you will think rightly of it.
But as for knowledge and truth, even as in our illustration it is right to deem light and vision sunlike, but never to think that they are the sun, so here it is right to consider these two their counterparts, as being like the good or boniform, but to think that either of them is the good is not right.
Still higher honor belongs to the possession and habit of the good."
"An inconceivable beauty you speak of," he said, "if it is the source of knowledge and truth, and yet itself surpasses them in beauty.
For you surely cannot mean that it is pleasure."
"Hush," said I, "but examine the similitude of it still further in this way."
"How?"
"The sun, I presume you will say, not only furnishes to visibles the power of visibility but it also provides for their generation and growth and nurture though it is not itself generation."
"Of course not."
"In like manner, then, you are to say that the objects of knowledge not only receive from the presence of the good their being known, but their very existence and essence is derived to them from it, though the good itself is not essence but still transcends essence in dignity and surpassing power."
And Glaucon very ludicrously said, "Heaven save us, hyperbole can no further go."
"The fault is yours," I said, "for compelling me to utter my thoughts about it."
"And don't desist," he said, "but at least expound the similitude of the sun, if there is anything that you are omitting."
"Why, certainly," I said, "I am omitting a great deal."
"Well, don't omit the least bit," he said.
"I fancy," I said, "that I shall have to pass over much, but nevertheless so far as it is at present practicable I shall not willingly leave anything out."
"Do not," he said.
"Conceive then," said I, "as we were saying, that there are these two entities, and that one of them is sovereign over the intelligible order and region and the other over the world of the eye-ball, not to say the sky-ball, but let that pass.
You surely apprehend the two types, the visible and the intelligible."
"I do."
"Represent them then, as it were, by a line divided into two unequal sections and cut each section again in the same ratio (the section, that is, of the visible and that of the intelligible order), and then as an expression of the ratio of their comparative clearness and obscurity you will have, as one of the sections of the visible world, images.
By images I mean, first, shadows, and then reflections in water and on surfaces of dense, smooth and bright texture, and everything of that kind, if you apprehend."
"I do."
"As the second section assume that of which this is a likeness or an image, that is, the animals about us and all plants and the whole class of objects made by man."
"I so assume it," he said.
"Would you be willing to say," said I, "that the division in respect of reality and truth or the opposite is expressed by the proportion: as is the opinable to the knowable so is the likeness to that of which it is a likeness?"
"I certainly would."
"Consider then again the way in which we are to make the division of the intelligible section."
"In what way?"
"By the distinction that there is one section of it which the soul is compelled to investigate by treating as images the things imitated in the former division, and by means of assumptions from which it proceeds not up to a first principle but down to a conclusion,
while there is another section in which it advances from its assumption to a beginning or principle that transcends assumption, and in which it makes no use of the images employed by the other section, relying on ideas only and progressing systematically through ideas."
"I don't fully understand what you mean by this," he said.
"Well, I will try again," said I," for you will better understand after this preamble.
For I think you are aware that students of geometry and reckoning and such subjects first postulate the odd and the even and the various figures and three kinds of angles and other things akin to these in each branch of science, regard them as known, and, treating them as absolute assumptions, do not deign to render any further account of them to themselves or others, taking it for granted that they are obvious to everybody.
They take their start from these, and pursuing the inquiry from this point on consistently, conclude with that for the investigation of which they set out."
"Certainly," he said, "I know that."
"And do you not also know that they further make use of the visible forms and talk about them, though they are not thinking of them but of those things of which they are a likeness, pursuing their inquiry for the sake of the square as such and the diagonal as such, and not for the sake of the image of it which they draw?
And so in all cases.
The very things which they mould and draw, which have shadows and images of themselves in water, these things they treat in their turn as only images, but what they really seek is to get sight of those realities which can be seen only by the mind."
"True," he said.
"This then is the class that I described as intelligible, it is true,
but with the reservation first that the soul is compelled to employ assumptions in the investigation of it, not proceeding to a first principle because of its inability to extricate itself from and rise above its assumptions, and second, that it uses as images or likenesses the very objects that are themselves copied and adumbrated by the class below them, and that in comparison with these latter are esteemed as clear and held in honor."
"I understand," said he, "that you are speaking of what falls under geometry and the kindred arts."
"Understand then, that by the other section of the intelligible I mean that which the reason itself lays hold of by the power of dialectics,
treating its assumptions not as absolute beginnings but literally as hypotheses, underpinnings, footings, and springboards so to speak, to enable it to rise to that which requires no assumption and is the starting-point of all, and after attaining to that again taking hold of the first dependencies from it, so to proceed downward to the conclusion, making no use whatever of any object of sense but only of pure ideas moving on through ideas to ideas and ending with ideas."
"I understand," he said; "not fully, for it is no slight task that you appear to have in mind, but I do understand that you mean to distinguish the aspect of reality and the intelligible, which is contemplated by the power of dialectic, as something truer and more exact than the object of the so-called arts and sciences whose assumptions are arbitrary starting-points.
And though it is true that those who contemplate them are compelled to use their understanding and not their senses, yet because they do not go back to the beginning in the study of them but start from assumptions you do not think they possess true intelligence about them although the things themselves are intelligibles when apprehended in conjunction with a first principle.
And I think you call the mental habit of geometers and their like mind or understanding and not reason because you regard understanding as something intermediate between opinion and reason."
"Your interpretation is quite sufficient," I said;
"and now, answering to these four sections, assume these four affections occurring in the soul: intellection or reason for the highest, understanding for the second; assign belief to the third, and to the last picture-thinking or conjecture, and arrange them in a proportion, considering that they participate in clearness and precision in the same degree as their objects partake of truth and reality."
"I understand," he said; "I concur and arrange them as you bid."
"Next," said I, "compare our nature in respect of education and its lack to such an experience as this.
Picture men dwelling in a sort of subterranean cavern with a long entrance open to the light on its entire width.
Conceive them as having their legs and necks fettered from childhood, so that they remain in the same spot, able to look forward only, and prevented by the fetters from turning their heads.
Picture further the light from a fire burning higher up and at a distance behind them, and between the fire and the prisoners and above them a road along which a low wall has been built, as the exhibitors of puppet-shows have partitions before the men themselves, above which they show the puppets."
"All that I see," he said.
"See also, then, men carrying past the wall implements of all kinds that rise above the wall, and human images and shapes of animals as well, wrought in stone and wood and every material, some of these bearers presumably speaking and others silent."
"A strange image you speak of," he said, "and strange prisoners."
"Like to us," I said; "for, to begin with, tell me do you think that these men would have seen anything of themselves or of one another except the shadows cast from the fire on the wall of the cave that fronted them?"
"How could they," he said, "if they were compelled to hold their heads unmoved through life?"
"And again, would not the same be true of the objects carried past them?"
"Surely."
"If then they were able to talk to one another, do you not think that they would suppose that in naming the things that they saw they were naming the passing objects?"
"Necessarily."
"And if their prison had an echo from the wall opposite them,
when one of the passersby uttered a sound, do you think that they would suppose anything else than the passing shadow to be the speaker?"
"By Zeus, I do not," said he.
"Then in every way such prisoners would deem reality to be nothing else than the shadows of the artificial objects."
"Quite inevitably," he said.
"Consider, then, what would be the manner of the release and healing from these bonds and this folly if in the course of nature something of this sort should happen to them:
When one was freed from his fetters and compelled to stand up suddenly and turn his head around and walk and to lift up his eyes to the light, and in doing all this felt pain and, because of the dazzle and glitter of the light, was unable to discern the objects whose shadows he formerly saw,
what do you suppose would be his answer if someone told him that what he had seen before was all a cheat and an illusion, but that now, being nearer to reality and turned toward more real things, he saw more truly?
And if also one should point out to him each of the passing objects and constrain him by questions to say what it is,
do you not think that he would be at a loss and that he would regard what he formerly saw as more real than the things now pointed out to him?"
"Far more real," he said.
"And if he were compelled to look at the light itself, would not that pain his eyes, and would he not turn away and flee to those things which he is able to discern and regard them as in very deed more clear and exact than the objects pointed out?"
"It is so," he said.
"And if," said I, "someone should drag him thence by force up the ascent which is rough and steep, and not let him go before he had drawn him out into the light of the sun, do you not think that he would find it painful to be so haled along, and would chafe at it, and when he came out into the light, that his eyes would be filled with its beams so that he would not be able to see even one of the things that we call real?"
"Why, no, not immediately," he said.
"Then there would be need of habituation, I take it, to enable him to see the things higher up.
And at first he would most easily discern the shadows and, after that, the likenesses or reflections in water of men and other things, and later, the things themselves, and from these he would go on to contemplate the appearances in the heavens and heaven itself, more easily by night, looking at the light of the stars and the moon, than by day the sun and the sun's light."
"Of course."
"And so, finally, I suppose, he would be able to look upon the sun itself and see its true nature, not by reflections in water or phantasms of it in an alien setting, but in and by itself in its own place."
"Necessarily," he said.
"And at this point he would infer and conclude that this it is that provides the seasons and the courses of the year and presides over all things in the visible region, and is in some sort the cause of all these things that they had seen."
"Obviously," he said, "that would be the next step."
"Well then, if he recalled to mind his first habitation and what passed for wisdom there, and his fellow-bondsmen, do you not think that he would count himself happy in the change and pity them?"
"He would indeed."
"And if there had been honors and commendations among them which they bestowed on one another and prizes for the man who is quickest to make out the shadows as they pass and best able to remember their customary precedences, sequences and co-existences, and so most successful in guessing at what was to come,
do you think he would be very keen about such rewards, and that he would envy and emulate those who were honored by these prisoners and lorded it among them,
or that he would feel with Homer and "'greatly prefer while living on earth to be serf of another, a landless man,' and endure anything rather than opine with them and live that life?"
"Yes," he said, "I think that he would choose to endure anything rather than such a life."
"And consider this also," said I,
"if such a one should go down again and take his old place would he not get his eyes full of darkness, thus suddenly coming out of the sunlight?"
"He would indeed."
"Now if he should be required to contend with these perpetual prisoners in 'evaluating' these shadows while his vision was still dim and before his eyes were accustomed to the dark and this time required for habituation would not be very short would he not provoke laughter, and would it not be said of him that he had returned from his journey aloft with his eyes ruined and that it was not worth while even to attempt the ascent?
And if it were possible to lay hands on and to kill the man who tried to release them and lead them up, would they not kill him?"
"They certainly would," he said.
"This image then, dear Glaucon, we must apply as a whole to all that has been said, likening the region revealed through sight to the habitation of the prison, and the light of the fire in it to the power of the sun.
And if you assume that the ascent and the contemplation of the things above is the soul's ascension to the intelligible region, you will not miss my surmise, since that is what you desire to hear.
But God knows whether it is true.
But, at any rate, my dream as it appears to me is that in the region of the known the last thing to be seen and hardly seen is the idea of good, and that when seen it must needs point us to the conclusion that this is indeed the cause for all things of all that is right and beautiful, giving birth in the visible world to light, and the author of light and itself in the intelligible world being the authentic source of truth and reason, and that anyone who is to act wisely in private or public must have caught sight of this."
"I concur," he said, "so far as I am able."
"Come then," I said, "and join me in this further thought, and do not be surprised that those who have attained to this height are not willing to occupy themselves with the affairs of men, but their souls ever feel the upward urge and the yearning for that sojourn above.
For this, I take it, is likely if in this point too the likeness of our image holds"
"Yes, it is likely."
"And again, do you think it at all strange," said I, "if a man returning from divine contemplations to the petty miseries of men cuts a sorry figure and appears most ridiculous,
if, while still blinking through the gloom, and before he has become sufficiently accustomed to the environing darkness, he is compelled in courtrooms or elsewhere to contend about the shadows of justice or the images that cast the shadows and to wrangle in debate about the notions of these things in the minds of those who have never seen justice itself?"
"It would be by no men strange," he said.
"But a sensible man," I said, "would remember that there are two distinct disturbances of the eyes arising from two causes, according as the shift is from light to darkness or from darkness to light,
and, believing that the same thing happens to the soul too, whenever he saw a soul perturbed and unable to discern something, he would not laugh unthinkingly,
but would observe whether coming from a brighter life its vision was obscured by the unfamiliar darkness, or whether the passage from the deeper dark of ignorance into a more luminous world and the greater brightness had dazzled its vision.
And so he would deem the one happy in its experience and way of life and pity the other, and if it pleased him to laugh at it, his laughter would be less laughable than that at the expense of the soul that had come down from the light above."
"That is a very fair statement," he said.
"Then, if this is true, our view of these matters must be this, that education is not in reality what some people proclaim it to be in their professions.
What they aver is that they can put true knowledge into a soul that does not possess it, as if they were inserting vision into blind eyes."
"They do indeed," he said.
"But our present argument indicates," said I, "that the true analogy for this indwelling power in the soul and the instrument whereby each of us apprehends is that of an eye that could not be converted to the light from the darkness except by turning the whole body.
Even so this organ of knowledge must be turned around from the world of becoming together with the entire soul, like the scene-shifting periact in the theater, until the soul is able to endure the contemplation of essence and the brightest region of being.
And this, we say, is the good, do we not?"
"Yes."
"Of this very thing, then," I said, "there might be an art, an art of the speediest and most effective shifting or conversion of the soul, not an art of producing vision in it, but on the assumption that it possesses vision but does not rightly direct it and does not look where it should, an art of bringing this about."
"Yes, that seems likely," he said.
"Then the other so-called virtues of the soul do seem akin to those of the body.
For it is true that where they do not pre-exist, they are afterwards created by habit and practice.
But the excellence of thought, it seems, is certainly of a more divine quality, a thing that never loses its potency, but, according to the direction of its conversion, becomes useful and beneficent, or, again, useless and harmful.
Have you never observed in those who are popularly spoken of as bad, but smart men, how keen is the vision of the little soul, how quick it is to discern the things that interest it, a proof that it is not a poor vision which it has, but one forcibly enlisted in the service of evil, so that the sharper its sight the more mischief it accomplishes?"
"I certainly have," he said.
"Observe then," said I, "that this part of such a soul, if it had been hammered from childhood, and had thus been struck free of the leaden weights, so to speak, of our birth and becoming, which attaching themselves to it by food and similar pleasures and gluttonies turn downwards the vision of the soul
If, I say, freed from these, it had suffered a conversion towards the things that are real and true,
that same faculty of the same men would have been most keen in its vision of the higher things, just as it is for the things toward which it is now turned."
"It is likely," he said.
"Well, then," said I, "is not this also likely and a necessary consequence of what has been said, that neither could men who are uneducated and inexperienced in truth ever adequately preside over a state,
nor could those who had been permitted to linger on to the end in the pursuit of culture
the one because they have no single aim and purpose in life to which all their actions, public and private, must be directed,
and the others, because they will not voluntarily engage in action, believing that while still living they have been transported to the Islands of the Blest."
"True," he said.
"It is the duty of us, the founders, then," said I, "to compel the best natures to attain the knowledge which we pronounced the greatest, and to win to the vision of the good, to scale that ascent, and when they have reached the heights and taken an adequate view, we must not allow what is now permitted."
"What is that?"
"That they should linger there," I said, "and refuse to go down again among those bondsmen and share their labors and honors, whether they are of less or of greater worth."
"Do you mean to say that we must do them this wrong, and compel them to live an inferior life when the better is in their power?"
"You have again forgotten, my friend," said I, "that the law is not concerned with the special happiness of any class in the state,
but is trying to produce this condition in the city as a whole, harmonizing and adapting the citizens to one another by persuasion and compulsion, and requiring them to impart to one another any benefit which they are severally able to bestow upon the community, and that it itself creates such men in the state, not that it may allow each to take what course pleases him, but with a view to using them for the binding together of the commonwealth."
"True," he said, "I did forget it."
"Observe, then, Glaucon," said I, "that we shall not be wronging, either, the philosophers who arise among us, but that we can justify our action when we constrain them to take charge of the other citizens and be their guardians.
For we will say to them that it is natural that men of similar quality who spring up in other cities should not share in the labors there.
For they grow up spontaneously from no volition of the government in the several states, and it is justice that the self-grown, indebted to none for its breeding, should not be zealous either to pay to anyone the price of its nurture.
But you we have engendered for yourselves and the rest of the city to be, as it were, king-bees and leaders in the hive.
You have received a better and more complete education than the others, and you are more capable of sharing both ways of life.
Down you must go then, each in his turn, to the habitation of the others and accustom yourselves to the observation of the obscure things there.
For once habituated you will discern them infinitely better than the dwellers there, and you will know what each of the 'idols' is and whereof it is a semblance,
because you have seen the reality of the beautiful, the just and the good.
So our city will be governed by us and you with waking minds, and not, as most cities now which are inhabited and ruled darkly as in a dream by men who fight one another for shadows and wrangle for office as if that were a great good,
when the truth is that the city in which those who are to rule are least eager to hold office must needs be best administered and most free from dissension, and the state that gets the contrary type of ruler will be the opposite of this."
"By all means," he said.
"Will our alumni, then, disobey us when we tell them this, and will they refuse to share in the labors of state each in his turn while permitted to dwell the most of the time with one another in that purer world?"
"Impossible," he said: "for we shall be imposing just commands on men who are just.
Yet they will assuredly approach office as an unavoidable necessity, and in the opposite temper from that of the present rulers in our cities."
"For the fact is, dear friend," said I, "if you can discover a better way of life than office-holding for your future rulers, a well-governed city becomes a possibility.
For only in such a state will those rule who are really rich, not in gold, but in the wealth that makes happiness a good and wise life.
But if, being beggars and starvelings from lack of goods of their own, they turn to affairs of state thinking that it is thence that they should grasp their own good, then it is impossible.
For when office and rule become the prizes of contention, such a civil and internecine strife destroys the office-seekers themselves and the city as well."
"Most true," he said.
"Can you name any other type or ideal of life that looks with scorn on political office except the life of true philosophers?" I asked.
"No, by Zeus," he said.
"But what we require is that those who take office should not be lovers of rule.
Otherwise there will be a contest with rival lovers."
"Surely."
"What others, then, will you compel to undertake the guardianship of the city than those who have most intelligence of the principles that are the means of good government and who possess distinctions of another kind and a life that is preferable to the political life?"
"No others," he said.
"Would you, then, have us proceed to consider how such men may be produced in a state and how they may be led upward to the light even as some are fabled to have ascended from Hades to the gods?"
"Of course I would."
"So this, it seems, would not be the whirling of the shell in the children's game, but a conversion and turning about of the soul from a day whose light is darkness to the veritable day that ascension to reality of our parable which we will affirm to be true philosophy."
"By all means."
"Must we not, then, consider what studies have the power to effect this?"
"Of course."
"What, then, Glaucon, would be the study that would draw the soul away from the world of becoming to the world of being?
A thought strikes me while I speak: Did we not say that these men in youth must be athletes of war"
"We did."
"Then the study for which we are seeking must have this additional qualification."
"What one?"
"That it be not useless to soldiers."
"Why, yes, it must," he said, "if that is possible."
"But in our previous account they were educated in gymnastics and music."
"They were, he said.
"And gymnastics, I take it, is devoted to that which grows and perishes; for it presides over the growth and decay of the body."
"Obviously."
"Then this cannot be the study that we seek."
"No."
"Is it, then, music, so far as we have already described it?"
"Nay, that," he said, "was the counterpart of gymnastics, if you remember.
It educated the guardians through habits, imparting by the melody a certain harmony of spirit that is not science, and by the rhythm measure and grace, and also qualities akin to these in the words of tales that are fables and those that are more nearly true.
But it included no study that tended to any such good as you are now seeking."
"Your recollection is most exact," I said; "for in fact it had nothing of the kind.
But in heaven's name, Glaucon, what study could there be of that kind?
For all the arts were in our opinion base and mechanical."
"Surely;
and yet what other study is left apart from music, gymnastics and the arts?"
"Come," said I, "if we are unable to discover anything outside of these, let us take something that applies to all alike."
"What?"
"Why, for example, this common thing that all arts and forms of thought and all sciences employ, and which is among the first things that everybody must learn."
"What?"
he said.
"This trifling matter," I said, "of distinguishing one and two and three.
I mean, in sum, number and calculation.
Is it not true of them that every art and science must necessarily partake of them?"
"Indeed it is," he said.
"The art of war too?" said I.
"Most necessarily," he said.
"Certainly, then," said I, "Palamedes in the play is always making Agamemnon appear a most ridiculous general.
Have you not noticed that he affirms that by the invention of number he marshalled the troops in the army at Troy in ranks and companies and enumerated the ships and everything else as if before that they had not been counted,
and Agamemnon apparently did not know how many feet he had if he couldn't count?
And yet what sort of a General do you think he would be in that case?"
"A very queer one in my opinion," he said, "if that was true."
"Shall we not, then," I said, "set down as a study requisite for a soldier the ability to reckon and number?"
"Most certainly, if he is to know anything whatever of the ordering of his troops or rather if he is to be a man at all."
"Do you observe then," said I, "in this study what I do?"
"What?"
"It seems likely that it is one of those studies which we are seeking that naturally conduce to the awakening of thought, but that no one makes the right use of it, though it really does tend to draw the mind to essence and reality."
"What do you mean?" he said.
"I will try," I said, "to show you at least my opinion.
Do you keep watch and observe the things I distinguish in my mind as being or not being conducive to our purpose, and either concur or dissent, in order that here too we may see more clearly whether my surmise is right."
"Point them out," he said.
"I do point them out," I said, "if you can discern that some reports of our perceptions do not provoke thought to reconsideration because the judgement of them by sensation seems adequate, while others always invite the intellect to reflection because the sensation yields nothing that can be trusted."
"You obviously mean distant appearances," he said, "and shadow-painting."
"You have quite missed my meaning," said I.
"What do you mean?" he said.
"The experiences that do not provoke thought are those that do not at the same time issue in a contradictory perception.
Those that do have that effect I set down as provocatives, when the perception no more manifests one thing than its contrary, alike whether its impact comes from nearby or afar.
An illustration will make my meaning plain.
Here, we say, are three fingers, the little finger, the second and the middle."
"Quite so," he said.
"Assume that I speak of them as seen near at hand.
But this is the point that you are to consider."
"What?"
"Each one of them appears to be equally a finger, and in this respect it makes no difference whether it is observed as intermediate or at either extreme, whether it is white or black, thick or thin, or of any other quality of this kind.
For in none of these cases is the soul of most men impelled to question the reason and to ask what in the world is a finger, since the faculty of sight never signifies to it at the same time that the finger is the opposite of a finger."
"Why, no, it does not," he said.
"Then," said I, "it is to be expected that such a perception will not provoke or awaken reflection and thought."
"It is."
"But now, what about the bigness and the smallness of these objects? Is our vision's view of them adequate,
and does it make no difference to it whether one of them is situated outside or in the middle;
and similarly of the relation of touch, to thickness and thinness, softness and hardness?
And are not the other senses also defective in their reports of such things?
Or is the operation of each of them as follows?
In the first place, the sensation that is set over the hard is of necessity related also to the soft, and it reports to the soul that the same thing is both hard and soft to its perception."
"It is so," he said.
"Then," said I, "is not this again a case where the soul must be at a loss as to what significance for it the sensation of hardness has, if the sense reports the same thing as also soft?
And, similarly, as to what the sensation of light and heavy means by light and heavy, if it reports the heavy as light, and the light as heavy?"
"Yes, indeed," he said, "these communications to the soul are strange and invite reconsideration."
"Naturally, then," said I, "it is in such cases as these that the soul first summons to its aid the calculating reason and tries to consider whether each of the things reported to it is one or two."
"Of course."
"And if it appears to be two, each of the two is a distinct unit."
"Yes."
"If, then, each is one and both two, the very meaning of 'two' is that the soul will conceive them as distinct.
For if they were not separable, it would not have been thinking of two, but of one."
"Right."
"Sight too saw the great and the small, we say, not separated but confounded.
"Is not that so?"
"Yes."
"And for the clarification of this, the intelligence is compelled to contemplate the great and small, not thus confounded but as distinct entities, in the opposite way from sensation."
"True."
"And is it not in some such experience as this that the question first occurs to us, what in the world, then, is the great and the small?"
"By all means."
"And this is the origin of the designation "intelligible" for the one, and "visible" for the other."
"Just so," he said.
"This, then, is just what I was trying to explain a little while ago when I said that some things are provocative of thought and some are not, defining as provocative things that impinge upon the senses together with their opposites, while those that do not I said do not tend to awaken reflection."
"Well, now I understand," he said, "and agree."
"To which class, then, do you think number and the one belong?"
"I cannot conceive," he said.
"Well, reason it out from what has already been said.
For, if unity is adequately seen by itself or apprehended by some other sensation, it would not tend to draw the mind to the apprehension of essence, as we were explaining in the case of the finger.
But if some contradiction is always seen coincidentally with it, so that it no more appears to be one than the opposite, there would forthwith be need of something to judge between them,
and it would compel the soul to be at a loss and to inquire, by arousing thought in itself, and to ask, whatever then is the one as such,
and thus the study of unity will be one of the studies that guide and convert the soul to the contemplation of true being."
"But surely," he said, "the visual perception of it does especially involve this.
For we see the same thing at once as one and as an indefinite plurality."
"Then if this is true of the one," I said, "the same holds of all number, does it not?"
"Of course."
"But, further, reckoning and the science of arithmetic are wholly concerned with number."
"They are, indeed."
"And the qualities of number appear to lead to the apprehension of truth."
"Beyond anything," he said.
"Then, as it seems, these would be among the studies that we are seeking.
For a soldier must learn them in order to marshal his troops, and a philosopher, because he must rise out of the region of generation and lay hold on essence or he can never become a true reckoner."
"It is so," he said.
"And our guardian is soldier and philosopher in one."
"Of course."
"It is befitting, then, Glaucon, that this branch of learning should be prescribed by our law and that we should induce those who are to share the highest functions of state to enter upon that study of calculation and take hold of it, not as amateurs, but to follow it up until they attain to the contemplation of the nature of number, by pure thought,
not for the purpose of buying and selling, as if they were preparing to be merchants or hucksters, but for the uses of war and for facilitating the conversion of the soul itself from the world of generation to essence and truth."
"Excellently said," he replied.
"And, further," I said, "it occurs to me, now that the study of reckoning has been mentioned, that there is something fine in it, and that it is useful for our purpose in many ways, provided it is pursued for the sake of knowledge and not for huckstering."
"In what respect?"
he said.
"Why, in respect of the very point of which we were speaking, that it strongly directs the soul upward and compels it to discourse about pure numbers, never acquiescing if anyone proffers to it in the discussion numbers attached to visible and tangible bodies.
For you are doubtless aware that experts in this study, if anyone attempts to cut up the 'one' in argument, laugh at him and refuse to allow it; but if you mince it up, they multiply, always on guard lest the one should appear to be not one but a multiplicity of parts."
"Most true," he replied.
"Suppose now, Glaucon, someone were to ask them, 'My good friends, what numbers are these you are talking about, in which the one is such as you postulate, each unity equal to every other without the slightest difference and admitting no division into parts?' What do you think would be their answer?"
"This, I think that they are speaking of units which can only be conceived by thought, and which it is not possible to deal with in any other way."
"You see, then, my friend," said I, "that this branch of study really seems to be indispensable for us, since it plainly compels the soul to employ pure thought with a view to truth itself."
"It most emphatically does."
"Again, have you ever noticed this, that natural reckoners are by nature quick in virtually all their studies?
And the slow, if they are trained and drilled in this, even if no other benefit results, all improve and become quicker than they were?"
"It is so," he said.
"And, further, as I believe, studies that demand more toil in the learning and practice than this we shall not discover easily nor find many of them."
"You will not, in fact."
"Then, for all these reasons, we must not neglect this study, but must use it in the education of the best endowed natures."
"I agree," he said.
"Assuming this one point to be established," I said, "let us in the second place consider whether the study that comes next is suited to our purpose."
"What is that?
Do you mean geometry," he said.
"Precisely that," said I.
"So much of it," he said, "as applies to the conduct of war is obviously suitable.
For in dealing with encampments and the occupation of strong places and the bringing of troops into column and line and all the other formations of an army in actual battle and on the march, an officer who had studied geometry would be a very different person from what he would be if he had not."
"But still," I said, "for such purposes a slight modicum of geometry and calculation would suffice.
What we have to consider is whether the greater and more advanced part of it tends to facilitate the apprehension of the idea of good.
That tendency, we affirm, is to be found in all studies that force the soul to turn its vision round to the region where dwells the most blessed part of reality, which it is imperative that it should behold."
"You are right," he said.
"Then if it compels the soul to contemplate essence, it is suitable; if genesis, it is not."
"So we affirm."
"This at least," said I, "will not be disputed by those who have even a slight acquaintance with geometry, that this science is in direct contradiction with the language employed in it by its adepts."
"How so?"
he said.
"Their language is most ludicrous,
though they cannot help it, for they speak as if they were doing something and as if all their words were directed towards action.
For all their talk is of squaring and applying and adding and the like, whereas in fact the real object of the entire study is pure knowledge."
"That is absolutely true," he said.
"And must we not agree on a further point?"
"What?"
"That it is the knowledge of that which always is, and not of a something which at some time comes into being and passes away."
"That is readily admitted," he said, "for geometry is the knowledge of the eternally existent."
"Then, my good friend, it would tend to draw the soul to truth, and would be productive of a philosophic attitude of mind, directing upward the faculties that now wrongly are turned earthward."
"Nothing is surer," he said.
"Then nothing is surer," said I, "than that we must require that the men of your Fair City shall never neglect geometry,
for even the by-products of such study are not slight."
"What are they?"
said he.
"What you mentioned," said I, "its uses in war, and also we are aware that for the better reception of all studies there will be an immeasurable difference between the student who has been imbued with geometry and the one who has not."
"Immense indeed, by Zeus," he said.
"Shall we, then, lay this down as a second branch of study for our lads?"
"Let us do so," he said.
"Shall we set down astronomy as a third, or do you dissent?"
"I certainly agree," he said; "for quickness of perception about the seasons and the courses of the months and the years is serviceable, not only to agriculture and navigation, but still more to the military art."
"I am amused," said I, "at your apparent fear lest the multitude may suppose you to be recommending useless studies.
It is indeed no trifling task, but very difficult to realize that there is in every soul an organ or instrument of knowledge that is purified and kindled afresh by such studies when it has been destroyed and blinded by our ordinary pursuits, a faculty whose preservation outweighs ten thousand eyes;
for by it only is reality beheld.
Those who share this faith will think your words superlatively true.
But those who have and have had no inkling of it will naturally think them all moonshine.
For they can see no other benefit from such pursuits worth mentioning.
Decide, then, on the spot, to which party you address yourself.
Or are you speaking to neither, but chiefly carrying on the discussion for your own sake, without however judging any other who may be able to profit by it?"
"This is the alternative I choose," he said, "that it is for my own sake chiefly that I speak and ask questions and reply."
"Fall back a little, then," said I; "for we just now did not rightly select the study that comes next after geometry."
"What was our mistake?"
he said.
"After plane surfaces," said I, "we went on to solids in revolution before studying them in themselves.
The right way is next in order after the second dimension to take the third.
This, I suppose, is the dimension of cubes and of everything that has depth."
"Why, yes, it is," he said; "but this subject, Socrates, does not appear to have been investigated yet."
"There are two causes of that," said I: "first, inasmuch as no city holds them in honor, these inquiries are languidly pursued owing to their difficulty.
And secondly, the investigators need a director, who is indispensable for success and who, to begin with, is not easy to find, and then, if he could be found, as things are now, seekers in this field would be too arrogant to submit to his guidance.
But if the state as a whole should join in superintending these studies and honor them, these specialists would accept advice, and continuous and strenuous investigation would bring out the truth.
Since even now, lightly esteemed as they are by the multitude and hampered by the ignorance of their students as to the true reasons for pursuing them, they nevertheless in the face of all these obstacles force their way by their inherent charm and it would not surprise us if the truth about them were made apparent."
"It is true," he said, "that they do possess an extraordinary attractiveness and charm.
But explain more clearly what you were just speaking of.
The investigation of plane surfaces, I presume, you took to be geometry?"
"Yes," said I.
"And then," he said, "at first you took astronomy next and then you drew back."
"Yes," I said, "for in my haste to be done I was making less speed.
For, while the next thing in order is the study of the third dimension or solids, I passed it over because of our absurd neglect to investigate it, and mentioned next after geometry astronomy, which deals with the movements of solids."
"That is right," he said.
"Then, as our fourth study," said I, "let us set down astronomy, assuming that this science, the discussion of which has been passed over, is available, provided, that is, that the state pursues it."
"That is likely," said he;
"and instead of the vulgar utilitarian commendation of astronomy, for which you just now rebuked me, Socrates, I now will praise it on your principles.
For it is obvious to everybody, I think, that this study certainly compels the soul to look upward and leads it away from things here to those higher things."
"It may be obvious to everybody except me," said I, "for I do not think so."
"What do you think?"
he said.
"As it is now handled by those who are trying to lead us up to philosophy, I think that it turns the soul's gaze very much downward."
"What do you mean?" he said.
"You seem to me in your thought to put a most liberal interpretation on the 'study of higher things,'" I said,
"for apparently if anyone with back-thrown head should learn something by staring at decorations on a ceiling, you would regard him as contemplating them with the higher reason and not with the eyes.
Perhaps you are right and I am a simpleton.
For I, for my part, am unable to suppose that any other study turns the soul's gaze upward than that which deals with being and the invisible.
But if anyone tries to learn about the things of sense, whether gaping up or blinking down, I would never say that he really learns
for nothing of the kind admits of true knowledge
nor would I say that his soul looks up, but down, even though he study floating on his back on sea or land."
"A fair retort," he said; "your rebuke is deserved.
But how, then, did you mean that astronomy ought to be taught contrary to the present fashion if it is to be learned in a way to conduce to our purpose?"
"Thus," said I, "these sparks that paint the sky, since they are decorations on a visible surface, we must regard, to be sure, as the fairest and most exact of material things
but we must recognize that they fall far short of the truth, the movements, namely, of real speed and real slowness in true number and in all true figures both in relation to one another and as vehicles of the things they carry and contain. These can be apprehended only by reason and thought, but not by sight; or do you think otherwise?"
"By no means," he said.
"Then," said I, "we must use the blazonry of the heavens as patterns to aid in the study of those realities, just as one would do who chanced upon diagrams drawn with special care and elaboration by Daedalus or some other craftsman or painter.
For anyone acquainted with geometry who saw such designs would admit the beauty of the workmanship, but would think it absurd to examine them seriously in the expectation of finding in them the absolute truth with regard to equals or doubles or any other ratio."
"How could it be otherwise than absurd?"
he said.
"Do you not think," said I, "that one who was an astronomer in very truth would feel in the same way when he turned his eyes upon the movements of the stars?
He will be willing to concede that the artisan of heaven fashioned it and all that it contains in the best possible manner for such a fabric;
but when it comes to the proportions of day and night, and of their relation to the month, and that of the month to the year, and of the other stars to these and one another, do you not suppose that he will regard as a very strange fellow the man who believes that these things go on for ever without change or the least deviation though they possess bodies and are visible objects and that his unremitting quest the realities of these things?"
"I at least do think so," he said, "now that I hear it from you."
"It is by means of problems, then," said I, "as in the study of geometry, that we will pursue astronomy too, and we will let be the things in the heavens, if we are to have a part in the true science of astronomy and so convert to right use from uselessness that natural indwelling intelligence of the soul."
"You enjoin a task," he said, "that will multiply the labor of our present study of astronomy many times."
"And I fancy," I said, "that our other injunctions will be of the same kind if we are of any use as lawgivers.
"However, what suitable studies have you to suggest?"
"Nothing," he said, "thus off-hand."
"Yet, surely," said I, "motion in general provides not one but many forms or species, according to my opinion.
To enumerate them all will perhaps be the task of a wise man, but even to us two of them are apparent."
"What are they?"
"In addition to astronomy, its counterpart, I replied."
"What is that?"
"We may venture to suppose," I said, "that as the eyes are framed for astronomy so the ears are framed, for the movements of harmony; and these are in some sort kindred sciences, as the Pythagoreans affirm and we admit, do we not, Glaucon?"
"We do," he said.
"Then," said I, since the task is, so great, shall we not inquire of them what their opinion is and whether they have anything to add?
And we in all this will be on the watch for what concerns us."
"What is that?"
"To prevent our fosterlings from attempting to learn anything that does not conduce to the end we have in view, and does not always come out at what we said ought to be the goal of everything, as we were just now saying about astronomy.
Or do you not know that they repeat the same procedure in the case of harmonies?
They transfer it to hearing and measure audible concords and sounds against one another, expending much useless labor just as the astronomers do."
"Yes, by heaven," he said, "and most absurdly too. They talk of something they call minims and, laying their ears alongside, as if trying to catch a voice from next door, some affirm that they can hear a note between and that this is the least interval and the unit of measurement, while others insist that the strings now render identical sounds, both preferring their ears to their minds."
"You," said I, "are speaking of the worthies who vex and torture the strings and rack them on the pegs; but not to draw out the comparison with strokes of the plectrum and the musician's complaints of too responsive and too reluctant strings I drop the figure, and tell you that I do not mean these people, but those others whom we just now said we would interrogate about harmony.
Their method exactly corresponds to that of the astronomer;
for the numbers they seek are those found in these heard concords, but they do not ascend to generalized problems and the consideration which numbers are inherently concordant and which not and why in each case."
"A superhuman task," he said.
"Say, rather, useful, said I, for the investigation of the beautiful and the good, but if otherwise pursued, useless."
"That is likely," he said.
"And what is more," I said, I take it that if the investigation of all these studies goes far enough to bring out their community and kinship with one another, and to infer their affinities, then to busy ourselves with them contributes to our desired end, and the labor taken is not lost; but otherwise it is vain."
"I too so surmise," said he;
"but it is a huge task of which you speak, Socrates."
"Are you talking about the prelude," I said, "or what?
Or do we not know that all this is but the preamble of the law itself, the prelude of the strain that we have to apprehend?
For you surely do not suppose that experts in these matters are reasoners and dialecticians?
No, by Zeus," he said, "except a very few whom I have met."
"But have you ever supposed," I said, "that men who could not render and exact an account of opinions in discussion would ever know anything of the things we say must be known?"
"'No' is surely the answer to that too."
"This, then, at last, Glaucon," I said, "is the very law which dialectics recites, the strain which it executes, of which, though it belongs to the intelligible, we may see an imitation in the progress of the faculty of vision, as we described its endeavor to look at living things themselves and the stars themselves and finally at the very sun.
In like manner, when anyone by dialectics attempts through discourse of reason and apart from all perceptions of sense to find his way to the very essence of each thing and does not desist till he apprehends by thought itself the nature of the good in itself, he arrives at the limit of the intelligible, as the other in our parable, came to the goal of the visible."
"By all means," he said.
"What, then, will you not call this progress of thought dialectic?"
"Surely."
"And the release from bonds," I said, "and the conversion from the shadows to the images that cast them and to the light and the ascent from the subterranean cavern to the world above,
and there the persisting inability to look directly at animals and plants and the light of the sun, but the ability to see the phantasms created by God in water and shadows of objects that are real and not merely, as before, the shadows of images cast through a light which, compared with the sun, is as unreal as they
all this procedure of the arts and sciences that we have described indicates their power to lead the best part of the soul up to the contemplation of what is best among realities,
as in our parable the clearest organ in the body was turned to the contemplation of what is brightest in the corporeal and visible region."
"I accept this," he said, "as the truth;
and yet it appears to me very hard to accept, and again, from another point of view, hard to reject.
Nevertheless, since we have not to hear it at this time only, but are to repeat it often hereafter, let us assume that these things are as now has been said, and proceed to the melody itself, and go through with it as we have gone through the prelude.
Tell me, then, what is the nature of this faculty of dialectic?
Into what divisions does it fall?
And what are its ways?
For it is these, it seems, that would bring us to the place where we may, so to speak, rest on the road and then come to the end of our journeying."
"You will not be able, dear Glaucon, to follow me further, though on my part there will be no lack of goodwill.
And, if I could, I would show you, no longer an image and symbol of my meaning, but the very truth, as it appears to me though whether rightly or not I may not properly affirm.
But that something like this is what we have to see, I must affirm. Is not that so?"
"Surely."
"And may we not also declare that nothing less than the power of dialectics could reveal this, and that only to one experienced in the studies we have described, and that the thing is in no other wise possible?"
"That, too," he said, "we may properly affirm."
"This, at any rate," said I, "no one will maintain in dispute against us: that there is any other way of inquiry that attempts systematically and in all cases to determine what each thing really is.
But all the other arts have for their object the opinions and desires of men or are wholly concerned with generation and composition or with the service and tendency of the things that grow and are put together,
while the remnant which we said did in some sort lay hold on reality geometry and the studies that accompany it are, as we see, dreaming about being,
but the clear waking vision of it is impossible for them as long as they leave the assumptions which they employ undisturbed and cannot give any account of them.
For where the starting-point is something that the reasoner does not know, and the conclusion and all that intervenes is a tissue of things not really known,
what possibility is there that assent in such cases can ever be converted into true knowledge or science?"
"None," said he.
"Then," said I, "is not dialectics the only process of inquiry that advances in this manner, doing away with hypotheses, up to the first principle itself in order to find confirmation there?
And it is literally true that when the eye of the soul is sunk in the barbaric slough of the Orphic myth, dialectic gently draws it forth and leads it up, employing as helpers and co-operators in this conversion the studies and sciences which we enumerated, which we called sciences often from habit, though they really need some other designation, connoting more clearness than opinion and more obscurity than science.
'Understanding,' I believe, was the term we employed.
But I presume we shall not dispute about the name when things of such moment lie before us for consideration."
"No, indeed," he said.
"Are you satisfied, then," said I, "as before, to call the first division science, the second understanding, the third belief, and the fourth conjecture or picture-thought
and the last two collectively opinion, and the first two intellection, opinion dealing with generation and intellection with essence,
and this relation being expressed in the proportion: as essence is to generation, so is intellection to opinion; and as intellection is to opinion, so is science to belief, and understanding to image-thinking or surmise?
But the relation between their objective correlates and the division into two parts of each of these, the opinable, namely, and the intelligible, let us dismiss, Glaucon, lest it involve us in discussion many times as long as the preceding."
"Well," he said, "I agree with you about the rest of it, so far as I am able to follow."
"And do you not also give the name dialectician to the man who is able to exact an account of the essence of each thing?
And will you not say that the one who is unable to do this, in so far as he is incapable of rendering an account to himself and others, does not possess full reason and intelligence about the matter?"
"How could I say that he does?" he replied.
"And is not this true of the good likewise that the man who is unable to define in his discourse and distinguish and abstract from all other things the aspect or idea of the good, and who cannot, as it were in battle, running the gauntlet of all tests, and striving to examine everything by essential reality and not by opinion, hold on his way through all this without tripping in his reasoning
the man who lacks this power, you will say, does not really know the good itself or any particular good;
but if he apprehends any adumbration of it, his contact with it is by opinion, not by knowledge;
and dreaming and dozing through his present life, before he awakens here he will arrive at the house of Hades and fall asleep for ever?"
"Yes, by Zeus," said he, "all this I will stoutly affirm."
"But, surely," said I, "if you should ever nurture in fact your children whom you are now nurturing and educating in word, you would not suffer them, I presume, to hold rule in the state, and determine the greatest matters, being themselves as irrational as the lines so called in geometry."
"Why, no," he said.
"Then you will provide by law that they shall give special heed to the discipline that will enable them to ask and answer questions in the most scientific manner?"
"I will so legislate," he said, "in conjunction with you."
"Do you agree, then," said I, "that we have set dialectics above all other studies to be as it were the coping-stone and that no other higher kind of study could rightly be placed above it, but that our discussion of studies is now complete"
"I do," he said.
"The distribution, then, remains," said I, "to whom we are to assign these studies and in what way."
"Clearly," he said.
"Do you remember, then, the kind of man we chose in our former selection of rulers?"
"Of course," he said.
"In most respects, then," said I, "you must suppose that we have to choose those same natures.
The most stable, the most brave and enterprising are to be preferred, and, so far as practicable, the most comely.
But in addition we must now require that they not only be virile and vigorous in temper, but that they possess also the gifts of nature suitable to this type of education."
"What qualities are you distinguishing?"
"They must have, my friend, to begin with, a certain keenness for study, and must not learn with difficulty.
For souls are much more likely to flinch and faint in severe studies than in gymnastics, because the toil touches them more nearly, being peculiar to them and not shared with the body."
"True," he said.
"And we must demand a good memory and doggedness and industry in every sense of the word.
Otherwise how do you suppose anyone will consent both to undergo all the toils of the body and to complete so great a course of study and discipline?"
"No one could," he said, "unless most happily endowed."
"Our present mistake," said I, "and the disesteem that has in consequence fallen upon philosophy are, as I said before, caused by the unfitness of her associates and wooers.
They should not have been bastards but true scions."
"What do you mean?"
he said.
"In the first place," I said, "the aspirant to philosophy must not limp in his industry, in the one half of him loving, in the other shunning, toil.
This happens when anyone is a lover of gymnastics and hunting and all the labors of the body, yet is not fond of learning or of listening or inquiring, but in all such matters hates work.
And he too is lame whose industry is one-sided in the reverse way."
"Most true," he said.
"Likewise in respect of truth," I said, "we shall regard as maimed in precisely the same way the soul that hates the voluntary lie and is troubled by it in its own self and greatly angered by it in others, but cheerfully accepts the involuntary falsehood and is not distressed when convicted of lack of knowledge, but wallows in the mud of ignorance as insensitively as a pig."
"By all means," he said.
"And with reference to sobriety," said I, "and bravery and loftiness of soul and all the parts of virtue, we must especially be on our guard to distinguish the base-born from the true-born.
For when the knowledge necessary to make such discriminations is lacking in individual or state, they unawares employ at random for any of these purposes the crippled and base-born natures, as their friends or rulers."
"It is so indeed," he said.
"But we," I said, "must be on our guard in all such cases, since, if we bring men sound of limb and mind to so great a study and so severe a training, justice herself will have no fault to find with us, and we shall preserve the state and our polity.
But, if we introduce into it the other sort, the outcome will be just the opposite, and we shall pour a still greater flood of ridicule upon philosophy."
"That would indeed be shameful," he said.
"Most certainly," said I: "but here again I am making myself a little ridiculous."
"In what way?"
"I forgot," said I, "that we were jesting, and I spoke with too great intensity.
For, while speaking, I turned my eyes upon philosophy, and when I saw how she is undeservedly reviled, I was revolted, and, as if in anger, spoke too earnestly to those who are in fault."
"No, by Zeus, not too earnestly for me as a hearer."
"But too much so for me as a speaker," I said.
"But this we must not forget, that in our former selection we chose old men, but in this one that will not do.
For we must not take Solon's word for it that growing old a man is able to learn many things.
He is less able to do that than to run a race.
To the young belong all heavy and frequent labors."
"Necessarily," he said.
"Now, all this study of reckoning and geometry and all the preliminary studies that are indispensable preparation for dialectics must be presented to them while still young, not in the form of compulsory instruction."
"Why so?"
"Because," said I, "a free soul ought not to pursue any study slavishly; for while bodily labors performed under constraint do not harm the body, nothing that is learned under compulsion stays with the mind."
"True," he said.
"Do not, then, my friend, keep children to their studies by compulsion but by play. That will also better enable you to discern the natural capacities of each."
"There is reason in that," he said.
"And do you not remember," I said, "that we also declared that we must conduct the children to war on horseback to be spectators, and wherever it may be safe, bring them to the front and give them a taste of blood as we do with whelps?"
"I do remember."
"And those who as time goes on show the most facility in all these toils and studies and alarms are to be selected and enrolled on a list."
"At what age?" he said.
"When they are released from their prescribed gymnastics.
For that period, whether it be two or three years, incapacitates them for other occupations.
For great fatigue and much sleep are the foes of study,
and moreover one of our tests of them, and not the least, will be their behavior in their physical exercises."
"Surely it is,"
he said.
"After this period," I said, "those who are given preference from the twenty-year class will receive greater honors than the others, and they will be required to gather the studies which they disconnectedly pursued as children in their former education into a comprehensive survey of their affinities with one another and with the nature of things."
"That, at any rate, he said, is the only instruction that abides with those who receive it."
"And it is also," said I, "the chief test of the dialectical nature and its opposite.
For he who can view things in their connection is a dialectician; he who cannot, is not."
"I concur," he said.
"With these qualities in mind," I said, "it will be your task to make a selection of those who manifest them best from the group who are steadfast in their studies and in war and in all lawful requirements,
and when they have passed the thirtieth year to promote them, by a second selection from those preferred in the first, to still greater honors, and to prove and test them by the power of dialectic to see which of them is able to disregard the eyes and other senses and go on to being itself in company with truth.
And at this point, my friend, the greatest care is requisite."
"How so?"
he said.
"Do you not note," said I, "how great is the harm caused by our present treatment of dialectics?"
"What is that?"
he said.
"Its practitioners are infected with lawlessness."
"They are indeed."
"Do you suppose," I said, "that there is anything surprising in this state of mind, and do you not think it pardonable?"
"In what way, pray?"
he said.
"Their case," said I, "resembles that of a supposititious son reared in abundant wealth and a great and numerous family amid many flatterers, who on arriving at manhood should become aware that he is not the child of those who call themselves his parents, and should I not be able to find his true father and mother.
Can you divine what would be his feelings towards the flatterers and his supposed parents in the time when he did not know the truth about his adoption, and, again, when he knew it?
Or would you like to hear my surmise?"
"I would."
"Well, then, my surmise is," I said, "that he would be more likely to honor his reputed father and mother and other kin than the flatterers, and that there would be less likelihood of his allowing them to lack for anything, and that he would be less inclined to do or say to them anything unlawful, and less liable to disobey them in great matters than to disobey the flatterers during the time when he did not know the truth."
"It is probable," he said.
"But when he found out the truth, I surmise that he would grow more remiss in honor and devotion to them and pay more regard to the flatterers, whom he would heed more than before and would henceforth live by their rule, associating with them openly, while for that former father and his adoptive kin he would not care at all, unless he was naturally of a very good disposition."
"All that you say," he replied, "would be likely to happen.
But what is the pertinency of this comparison to the novices of dialectic?"
"It is this.
There are to us, I take it, certain convictions from childhood about the just and the honorable, in which, in obedience and honor to them, we have been bred as children under their parents."
"Yes, there are."
"And are there not other practices going counter to these, that have pleasures attached to them and that flatter and solicit our souls, but do not win over men of any decency; but they continue to hold in honor the teachings of their fathers and obey them?"
"It is so"
"Well, then," said I, "when a man of this kind is met by the question,'What is the honorable?' and on his giving the answer which he learned from the lawgiver,
the argument confutes him, and by many and various refutations upsets his faith and makes him believe that this thing is no more honorable than it is base,
and when he has had the same experience about the just and the good and everything that he chiefly held in esteem,
how do you suppose that he will conduct himself thereafter in the matter of respect and obedience to this traditional morality?"
"It is inevitable," he said, "that he will not continue to honor and obey as before."
"And then," said I, "when he ceases to honor these principles and to think that they are binding on him, and cannot discover the true principles, will he be likely to adopt any other way of life than that which flatters his desires?"
"He will not," he said.
"He will, then, seem to have become a rebel to law and convention instead of the conformer that he was."
"Necessarily."
"And is not this experience of those who take up dialectics in this fashion to be expected and, as I just now said, deserving of much leniency?"
"Yes, and of pity too," he said.
"Then that we may not have to pity thus your thirty-year-old disciples, must you not take every precaution when you introduce them to the study of dialectics?"
"Yes, indeed," he said.
"And is it not one chief safeguard not to suffer them to taste of it while young?
For I fancy you have not failed to observe that lads, when they first get a taste of disputation, misuse it as a form of sport, always employing it contentiously, and, imitating confuters, they themselves confute others.
They delight like spies in pulling about and tearing with words all who approach them."
"Exceedingly so," he said.
"And when they have themselves confuted many and been confuted by many, they quickly fall into a violent distrust of all that they formerly held true; and the outcome is that they themselves and the whole business of philosophy are discredited with other men."
"Most true," he said.
"But an older man will not share this craze," said I, "but rather choose to imitate the one who consents to examine truth dialectically than the one who makes a jest and a sport of mere contradiction, and so he will himself be more reasonable and moderate, and bring credit rather than discredit upon his pursuit."
"Right," he said.
"And were not all our preceding statements made with a view to this precaution our requirement that those permitted to take part in such discussions must have orderly and stable natures, instead of the present practice of admitting to it any chance and unsuitable applicant?"
"By all means," he said.
"Is it enough, then, to devote to the continuous and strenuous study of dialectics undisturbed by anything else, as in the corresponding discipline in bodily exercises, twice as many years as were allotted to that?"
"Do you mean six or four?" he said.
"Well," I said, "set it down as five.
For after that you will have to send them down into the cave again, and compel them to hold commands in war and the other offices suitable to youth, so that they may not fall short of the other type in experience either.
And in these offices, too, they are to be tested to see whether they will remain steadfast under diverse solicitations or whether they will flinch and swerve."
"How much time do you allow for that?" he said.
"Fifteen years," said I,
"and at the age of fifty those who have survived the tests and approved themselves altogether the best in every task and form of knowledge must be brought at last to the goal.
We shall require them to turn upwards the vision of their souls and fix their gaze on that which sheds light on all,
and when they have thus beheld the good itself they shall use it as a pattern for the right ordering of the state and the citizens and themselves throughout the remainder of their lives, each in his turn, devoting the greater part of their time to the study of philosophy,
but when the turn comes for each, toiling in the service of the state and holding office for the city's sake, regarding the task not as a fine thing but a necessity;
and so, when each generation has educated others like themselves to take their place as guardians of the state, they shall depart to the Islands of the Blest and there dwell.
And the state shall establish public memorials and sacrifices for them as to divinities if the Pythian oracle approves or, if not, as to divine and godlike men."
"A most beautiful finish, Socrates, you have put upon your rulers, as if you were a statuary."
"And on the women too, Glaucon," said I; "for you must not suppose that my words apply to the men more than to all women who arise among them endowed with the requisite qualities."
"That is right," he said, "if they are to share equally in all things with the men as we laid it down."
"Well, then," said I, "do you admit that our notion of the state and its polity is not altogether a daydream, but that though it is difficult, it is in a way possible and in no other way than that described
when genuine philosophers, many or one, becoming masters of the state scorn the present honors, regarding them as illiberal and worthless, but prize the right and the honors that come from that above all things, and regarding justice as the chief and the one indispensable thing, in the service and maintenance of that reorganize and administer their city?"
"In what way?"
he said.
"All inhabitants above the age of ten," I said, "they will send out into the fields, and they will take over the children, remove them from the manners and habits of their parents, and bring them up in their own customs and laws which will be such as we have described.
This is the speediest and easiest way in which such a city and constitution as we have portrayed could be established and prosper and bring most benefit to the people among whom it arises."
"Much the easiest," he said, "and I think you have well explained the manner of its realization if it should ever be realized."
"Then," said I, "have we not now said enough about this state and the corresponding type of man
for it is evident what our conception of him will be?"
"It is evident," he said, "and, to answer your question, I think we have finished."
"Very good. We are agreed then, Glaucon, that the state which is to achieve the height of good government must have community of wives and children and all education, and also that the pursuits of men and women must be the same in peace and war, and that the rulers or kings over them are to be those who have approved themselves the best in both war and philosophy."
"We are agreed," he said.
"And we further granted this, that when the rulers are established in office they shall conduct these soldiers and settle them in habitations such as we described, that have nothing private for anybody but are common for all, and in addition to such habitations we agreed, if you remember, what should be the nature of their possessions."
"Why, yes, I remember," he said, "that we thought it right that none of them should have anything that ordinary men now possess, but that, being as it were athletes of war and guardians, they should receive from the others as pay for their guardianship each year their yearly sustenance, and devote their entire attention to the care of themselves and the state."
"That is right," I said.
"But now that we have finished this topic let us recall the point at which we entered on the digression that has brought us here, so that we may proceed on our way again by the same path."
"That is easy," he said;
"for at that time, almost exactly as now, on the supposition that you had finished the description of the city, you were going on to say that you assumed such a city as you then described and the corresponding type of man to be good, and that too though, as it appears, you had a still finer city and type of man to tell of; but at any rate you were saying that the others are aberrations, if this city is right.
But regarding the other constitutions, my recollection is that you said there were four species worth speaking of and observing their defects and the corresponding types of men, in order that when we had seen them all and come to an agreement about the best and the worst man, we might determine whether the best is the happiest and the worst most wretched or whether it is otherwise.
And when I was asking what were the four constitutions you had in mind, Polemarchus and Adeimantus thereupon broke in, and that was how you took up the discussion again and brought to this point."
"Your memory is most exact," I said.
"A second time then, as in a wrestling-match, offer me the same hold, and when I repeat my question try to tell me what you were then about to say."
"I will if I can," said I.
"And indeed," said he, "I am eager myself to hear what four forms of government you meant."
"There will be no difficulty about that," said I.
"For those I mean are precisely those that have names in common usage: that which the many praised, your Cretan and Spartan constitution; and the second in place and in honor, that which is called oligarchy, a constitution teeming with many ills, and its sequent counterpart and opponent, democracy; and then the noble tyranny surpassing them all, the fourth and final malady of a state.
Can you mention any other type of government, I mean any other that constitutes a distinct species?
For, no doubt, there are hereditary principalities and purchased kingships, and similar intermediate constitutions which one could find in even greater numbers among the barbarians than among the Greeks."
"Certainly many strange ones are reported," he said.
"Are you aware, then," said I, "that there must be as many types of character among men as there are forms of government?
Or do you suppose that constitutions spring from the proverbial oak or rock and not from the characters of the citizens, which, as it were, by their momentum and weight in the scales draw other things after them?"
"They could not possibly come from any other source," he said.
"Then if the forms of government are five, the patterns of individual souls must be five also."
"Surely."
"Now we have already described the man corresponding to aristocracy or the government of the best, whom we aver to be the truly good and just man."
"We have described him."
"Must we not, then, next after this, survey the inferior types, the man who is contentious and covetous of honor, corresponding to the Laconian constitution, and the oligarchical man in turn, and the democratic and the tyrant,
in order that, after observing the most unjust of all, we may oppose him to the most just, and complete our inquiry as to the relation of pure justice and pure injustice in respect of the happiness and unhappiness of the possessor,
so that we may either follow the counsel of Thrasymachus and pursue injustice or the present argument and pursue justice?"
"Assuredly," he said, "that is what we have to do."
"Shall we, then, as we began by examining moral qualities in states before individuals, as being more manifest there, so now consider first the constitution based on the love of honor?
I do not know of any special name for it in use.
We must call it either timocracy or timarchy.
And then in connection with this we will consider the man of that type, and thereafter oligarchy and the oligarch, and again, fixing our eyes on democracy, we will contemplate the democratic man:
and fourthly, after coming to the city ruled by a tyrant and observing it, we will in turn take a look into the tyrannical soul, and so try to make ourselves competent judges of the question before us."
"That would be at least a systematic and consistent way of conducting the observation and the decision," he said.
"Come, then," said I, "let us try to tell in what way a timocracy would arise out of an aristocracy.
Or is this the simple and unvarying rule, that in every form of government revolution takes its start from the ruling class itself, when dissension arises in that, but so long as it is at one with itself, however small it be, innovation is impossible?"
"Yes, that is so."
"How, then, Glaucon," I said, "will disturbance arise in our city, and how will our helpers and rulers fall out and be at odds with one another and themselves?
Shall we, like Homer, invoke the Muses to tell "'how faction first fell upon them,'"
and say that these goddesses playing with us and teasing us as if we were children address us in lofty, mock-serious tragic style?"
"How?"
"Somewhat in this fashion.
Hard in truth it is for a state thus constituted to be shaken and disturbed;
but since for everything that has come into being destruction is appointed, not even such a fabric as this will abide for all time, but it shall surely be dissolved,
and this is the manner of its dissolution.
Not only for plants that grow from the earth but also for animals that live upon it there is a cycle of bearing and barrenness for soul and body as often as the revolutions of their orbs come full circle, in brief courses for the short-lived and oppositely for the opposite;
but the laws of prosperous birth or infertility for your race, the men you have bred to be your rulers will not for all their wisdom ascertain by reasoning combined with sensation,
but they will escape them, and there will be a time when they will beget children out of season.
Now for divine begettings there is a period comprehended by a perfect number,
and for mortal by the first in which augmentations dominating and dominated when they have attained to three distances and four limits of the assimilating and the dissimilating, the waxing and the waning, render all things conversable and commensurable with one another,
whereof a basal four-thirds wedded to the pempad yields two harmonies at the third augmentation, the one the product of equal factors taken one hundred times, the other of equal length one way but oblong,
one dimension of a hundred numbers determined by the rational diameters of the pempad lacking one in each case, or of the irrational lacking two;
the other dimension of a hundred cubes of the triad.
And this entire geometrical number is determinative of this thing, of better and inferior births.
And when your guardians, missing this, bring together brides and bridegrooms unseasonably, the offspring will not be well-born or fortunate.
Of such offspring the previous generation will establish the best, to be sure, in office, but still these, being unworthy, and having entered in turn into the powers of their fathers, will first as guardians begin to neglect us, paying too little heed to music and then to gymnastics,
so that our young men will deteriorate in their culture;
and the rulers selected from them will not approve themselves very efficient guardians for testing Hesiod's and our races of gold, silver, bronze and iron.
And this intermixture of the iron with the silver and the bronze with the gold will engender unlikeness and an unharmonious unevenness, things that always beget war and enmity wherever they arise.
"'Of this lineage, look you,'"
we must aver the dissension to be, wherever it occurs and always."
"'And rightly too,'" he said, "we shall affirm that the Muses answer."
"They must needs," I said, "since they are Muses."
"Well, then," said he, "what do the Muses say next?"
"When strife arose," said I, "the two groups were pulling against each other, the iron and bronze towards money-making and the acquisition of land and houses and gold and silver, and the other two, the golden and silvern, not being poor, but by nature rich in their souls, were trying to draw them back to virtue and their original constitution,
and thus, striving and contending against one another, they compromised on the plan of distributing and taking for themselves the land and the houses, enslaving and subjecting as perioeci and serfs their former friends and supporters, of whose freedom they had been the guardians, and occupying themselves with war and keeping watch over these subjects."
"I think," he said, "that this is the starting-point of the transformation."
"Would not this polity, then," said I, "be in some sort intermediate between aristocracy and oligarchy ?"
"By all means."
"By this change, then, it would arise.
But after the change what will be its way of life?
Is it not obvious that in some things it will imitate the preceding polity, in some the oligarchy, since it is intermediate, and that it will also have some qualities peculiar to itself?"
"That is so," he said.
"Then in honoring its rulers and in the abstention of its warrior class from farming and handicraft and money-making in general, and in the provision of common public tables and the devotion to physical training and expertness in the game and contest of war in all these traits it will copy the preceding state?"
"Yes."
"But in its fear to admit clever men to office, since the men it has of this kind are no longer simple and strenuous but of mixed strain, and in its inclining rather to the more high-spirited and simple-minded type, who are better suited for war than for peace, and in honoring the stratagems and contrivances of war and occupying itself with war most of the time in these respects for the most part its qualities will be peculiar to itself?"
"Yes."
"Such men," said I, "will be avid of wealth, like those in an oligarchy, and will cherish a fierce secret lust for gold and silver, owning storehouses and private treasuries where they may hide them away, and also the enclosures of their homes, literal private love-nests in which they can lavish their wealth on their women and any others they please with great expenditure."
"Most true," he said.
"And will they not be stingy about money, since they prize it and are not allowed to possess it openly, prodigal of others' wealth because of their appetites, enjoying their pleasures stealthily, and running away from the law as boys from a father, since they have not been educated by persuasion but by force because of their neglect of the true Muse, the companion of discussion and philosophy, and because of their preference of gymnastics to music?"
"You perfectly describe," he said, "a polity that is a mixture of good and evil."
"Why, yes, the elements have been mixed," I said, "but the most conspicuous feature in it is one thing only, due to the predominance of the high-spirited element, namely contentiousness and covetousness of honor."
"Very much so," said he.
"Such, then, would be the origin and nature of this polity if we may merely outline the figure of a constitution in words and not elaborate it precisely, since even the sketch will suffice to show us the most just and the most unjust type of man, and it would be an impracticable task to set forth all forms of government without omitting any, and all customs and qualities of men."
"Quite right," he said.
"What, then, is the man that corresponds to this constitution?
What is his origin and what his nature?"
"I fancy," Adeimantus said, "that he comes rather close to Glaucon here in point of contentiousness."
"Perhaps," said I, "in that, but I do not think their natures are alike in the following respects."
"In what?"
"He will have to be somewhat self-willed and lacking in culture, yet a lover of music and fond of listening to talk and speeches, though by no means himself a rhetorician;
and to slaves such a one would be harsh, not scorning them as the really educated do, but he would be gentle with the freeborn and very submissive to officials, a lover of office and of honor, not basing his claim to office on ability to speak or anything of that sort but on his exploits in war or preparation for war, and he would be a devotee of gymnastics and hunting."
"Why, yes," he said, "that is the spirit of that polity."
"And would not such a man be disdainful of wealth too in his youth, but the older he grew the more he would love it because of his participation in the covetous nature and because his virtue is not sincere and pure since it lacks the best guardian?"
"Which?"
said Adeimantus.
"Reason," said I, "blended with culture, which is the only indwelling preserver of virtue throughout life in the soul that possesses it."
"Well said," he replied.
"This is the character," I said, "of the timocratic youth, resembling the city that bears his name."
"By all means."
"His origin is somewhat on this wise: Sometimes he is the young son of a good father who lives in a badly governed state and avoids honors and office and law-suits and all such meddlesomeness and is willing to forbear something of his rights in order to escape trouble."
"How does he originate?" he said.
"Why, when, to begin with," I said, "he hears his mother complaining that her husband is not one of the rulers and for that reason she is slighted among the other women,
and when she sees that her husband is not much concerned about money and does not fight and brawl in private lawsuits and in the public assembly, but takes all such matters lightly,
and when she observes that he is self-absorbed in his thoughts and neither regards nor disregards her overmuch, and in consequence of all this laments and tells the boy that his father is too slack and no kind of a man, with all the other complaints with which women nag in such cases."
"Many indeed," said Adeimantus, "and after their kind."
"You are aware, then," said I, "that the very house-slaves of such men, if they are loyal and friendly, privately say the same sort of things to the sons,
and if they observe a debtor or any other wrongdoer whom the father does not prosecute,
they urge the boy to punish all such when he grows to manhood and prove himself more of a man than his father,
and when the lad goes out he hears and sees the same sort of thing.
Men who mind their own affairs in the city are spoken of as simpletons and are held in slight esteem,
while meddlers who mind other people's affairs are honored and praised.
Then it is that the youth, hearing and seeing such things, and on the other hand listening to the words of his father, and with a near view of his pursuits contrasted with those of other men, is solicited by both, his father watering and fostering the growth of the rational principle in his soul and the others the appetitive and the passionate;
and as he is not by nature of a bad disposition but has fallen into evil communications, under these two solicitations he comes to a compromise and turns over the government in his soul to the intermediate principle of ambition and high spirit and becomes a man haughty of soul and covetous of honor."
"You have, I think, most exactly described his origin."
"Then," said I, "we have our second polity and second type of man."
"We have," he said.
"Shall we then, as Aeschylus: would say, "'tell of another champion before another gate,'"
or rather, in accordance with our plan, the city first?"
"That, by all means," he said.
"The next polity, I believe, would be oligarchy."
"And what kind of a regime," said he, "do you understand by oligarchy?"
"That based on a property qualification," said I, "wherein the rich hold office and the poor man is excluded."
"I understand," said he.
"Then, is not the first thing to speak of how democracy passes over into this?"
"Yes."
"And truly," said I, "the manner of the change is plain even to the proverbial blind man."
"How so?"
"That treasure-house which each possesses filled with gold destroys that polity;
for first they invent ways of expenditure for themselves and pervert the laws to this end, and neither they nor their wives obey them."
"That is likely," he said.
"And then, I take it, by observing and emulating one another they bring the majority of them to this way of thinking."
"That is likely," he said.
"And so, as time goes on, and they advance in the pursuit of wealth, the more they hold that in honor the less they honor virtue.
May not the opposition of wealth and virtue be conceived as if each lay in the scale of a balance inclining opposite ways?"
"Yes, indeed," he said.
"So, when wealth is honored in a state, and the wealthy, virtue and the good are less honored."
"Obviously."
"And that which men at any time honor they practise, and what is not honored is neglected."
"It is so."
"Thus, finally, from being lovers of victory and lovers of honor they become lovers of gain-getting and of money, and they commend and admire the rich man and put him in office but despise the man who is poor."
"Quite so."
"And is it not then that they pass a law defining the limits of an oligarchical polity, prescribing a sum of money, a larger sum where it is more of an oligarchy, where it is less a smaller, and proclaiming that no man shall hold office whose property does not come up to the required valuation?
And this law they either put through by force of arms, or without resorting to that they establish their government by terrorization.
Is not that the way of it?"
"It is."
"The establishment then, one may say, is in this wise."
"Yes," he said, "but what is the character of this constitution,
and what are the defects that we said it had?"
"To begin with," said I, "consider the nature of its constitutive and defining principle.
Suppose men should appoint the pilots of ships in this way, by property qualification, and not allow a poor man to navigate, even if he were a better pilot."
"A sorry voyage they would make of it," he said.
"And is not the same true of any other form of rule?"
"I think so."
"Except of a city," said I, "or does it hold for a city too?"
"Most of all," he said, "by as much as that is the greatest and most difficult rule of all."
"Here, then, is one very great defect in oligarchy."
"So it appears."
"Well, and is this a smaller one?"
"What?"
"That such a city should of necessity be not one, but two, a city of the rich and a city of the poor, dwelling together, and always plotting against one another."
"No, by Zeus," said he, "it is not a bit smaller."
"Nor, further, can we approve of this the likelihood that they will not be able to wage war, because of the necessity of either arming and employing the multitude, and fearing them more than the enemy, or else, if they do not make use of them, of finding themselves on the field of battle, oligarchs indeed, and rulers over a few.
And to this must be added their reluctance to contribute money, because they are lovers of money."
"No, indeed."
"And what of the trait we found fault with long ago the fact that in such a state the citizens are busy-bodies and jacks-of-all-trades, farmers, financiers and soldiers all in one? Do you think that is right?"
"By no manner of means."
"Consider now whether this polity is not the first that admits that which is the greatest of all such evils."
"What?"
"The allowing a man to sell all his possessions, which another is permitted to acquire, and after selling them to go on living in the city, but as no part of it, neither a money-maker, nor a craftsman, nor a knight, nor a foot-soldier, but classified only as a pauper and a dependent."
"This is the first," he said.
"There certainly is no prohibition of that sort of thing in oligarchical states.
Otherwise some of their citizens would not be excessively rich, and others out and out paupers."
"Right."
"But observe this.
When such a fellow was spending his wealth, was he then of any more use to the state in the matters of which we were speaking,
or did he merely seem to belong to the ruling class, while in reality he was neither ruler nor helper in the state, but only a consumer of goods?"
"It is so," he said; "he only seemed, but was just a spendthrift."
"Shall we, then, say of him that as the drone springs up in the cell, a pest of the hive, so such a man grows up in his home, a pest of the state?"
"By all means, Socrates," he said.
"And has not God, Adeimantus, left the drones which have wings and fly stingless one and all, while of the drones here who travel afoot he has made some stingless but has armed others with terrible stings?
And from the stingless finally issue beggars in old age, but from those furnished with stings all that are denominated malefactors?"
"Most true," he said.
"It is plain, then," said I, "that wherever you see beggars in a city, there are somewhere in the neighborhood concealed thieves and cutpurses and temple-robbers and similar artists in crime."
"Clearly," he said.
"Well, then, in oligarchical cities do you not see beggars?"
"Nearly all are such," he said, "except the ruling class."
"Are we not to suppose, then, that there are also many criminals in them furnished with stings, whom the rulers by their surveillance forcibly restrain?"
"We must think so," he said.
"And shall we not say that the presence of such citizens is the result of a defective culture and bad breeding and a wrong constitution of the state?"
"We shall."
"Well, at any rate such would be the character of the oligarchical state, and these, or perhaps even more than these, would be the evils that afflict it."
"Pretty nearly these," he said.
"Then," I said, "let us regard as disposed of the constitution called oligarchy, whose rulers are determined by a property qualification.
And next we are to consider the man who resembles it how he arises and what after that his character is."
"Quite so," he said.
"Is not the transition from that timocratic youth to the oligarchical type mostly on this wise?"
"How?"
"When a son born to the timocratic man at first emulates his father, and follows in his footsteps and then sees him suddenly dashed, as a ship on a reef, against the state, and making complete wreckage of both his possessions and himself perhaps he has been a general, or has held some other important office, and has then been dragged into court by mischievous sycophants and put to death or banished or outlawed and has lost all his property "
"It is likely," he said.
"And the son, my friend, after seeing and suffering these things, and losing his property, grows timid, I fancy, and forthwith thrusts headlong from his bosom's throne that principle of love of honor and that high spirit, and being humbled by poverty turns to the getting of money, and greedily and stingily and little by little by thrift and hard work collects property.
Do you not suppose that such a one will then establish on that throne the principle of appetite and avarice, and set it up as the great king in his soul, adorned with tiaras and collars of gold, and girt with the Persian sword?"
"I do," he said.
"And under this domination he will force the rational and high-spirited principles to crouch lowly to right and left as slaves, and will allow the one to calculate and consider nothing but the ways of making more money from a little, and the other to admire and honor nothing but riches and rich men, and to take pride in nothing but the possession of wealth and whatever contributes to that?"
"There is no other transformation so swift and sure of the ambitious youth into the avaricious type."
"Is this, then, our oligarchical man?" said I.
"He is developed, at any rate, out of a man resembling the constitution from which the oligarchy sprang."
"Let us see, then, whether he will have a like character."
"Let us see."
"Would he not, in the first place, resemble it in prizing wealth above everything?"
"Inevitably."
"And also by being thrifty and laborious, satisfying only his own necessary appetites and desires and not providing for expenditure on other things, but subduing his other appetites as vain and unprofitable?"
"By all means."
"He would be a squalid fellow," said I, "looking for a surplus of profit in everything, and a hoarder, the type the multitude approves.
Would not this be the character of the man who corresponds to such a polity?"
"I certainly think so," he said.
"Property, at any rate, is the thing most esteemed by that state and that kind of man."
"That, I take it," said I, "is because he has never turned his thoughts to true culture."
"I think not," he said, "else he would not have made the blind one leader of his choir and first in honor."
"Well said," I replied.
"But consider this.
Shall we not say that owing to this lack of culture the appetites of the drone spring up in him, some the beggarly, others the rascally, but that they are forcibly restrained by his general self-surveillance and self- control?"
"Yes indeed," he said.
"Do you know, then," said I, "to what you must look to discern the rascalities of such men?"
"To what?"
he said.
"To guardianships of orphans, and any such opportunities of doing injustice with impunity."
"True."
"And is it not apparent by this that in other dealings, where he enjoys the repute of a seeming just man, he by some better element in himself forcibly keeps down other evil desires dwelling within, not persuading them that it 'is better not' nor taming them by reason, but by compulsion and fear, trembling for his possessions generally."
"Quite so," he said.
"Yes, by Zeus," said I, "my friend. In most of them, when there is occasion to spend the money of others, you will discover the existence of drone-like appetites."
"Most emphatically."
"Such a man, then, would not be free from internal dissension. He would not be really one, but in some sort a double man. Yet for the most part, his better desires would have the upper hand over the worse."
"It is so."
"And for this reason, I presume, such a man would be more seemly, more respectable, than many others; but the true virtue of a soul in unison and harmony with itself would escape him and dwell afar."
"I think so."
"And again, the thrifty stingy man would be a feeble competitor personally in the city for any prize of victory or in any other honorable emulation.
He is unwilling to spend money for fame and rivalries of that sort, and, fearing to awaken his prodigal desires and call them into alliance for the winning of the victory, he fights in true oligarchical fashion with a small part of his resources and is defeated for the most part and finds himself rich!"
"Yes indeed," he said.
"Have we any further doubt, then," I said, "as to the correspondence and resemblance between the thrifty and money-making man and the oligarchical state?"
"None," he said.
"We have next to consider, it seems, the origin and nature of democracy, that we may next learn the character of that type of man and range him beside the others for our judgement."
"That would at least be a consistent procedure."
"Then," said I, "is not the transition from oligarchy to democracy effected in some such way as this by the insatiate greed for that which it set before itself as the good, the attainment of the greatest possible wealth?"
"In what way?"
"Why, since its rulers owe their offices to their wealth, they are not willing to prohibit by law the prodigals who arise among the youth from spending and wasting their substance. Their object is, by lending money on the property of such men, and buying it in, to become still richer and more esteemed."
"By all means."
"And is it not at once apparent in a state that this honoring of wealth is incompatible with a sober and temperate citizenship, but that one or the other of these two ideals is inevitably neglected."
"That is pretty clear," he said.
"And such negligence and encouragement of licentiousness in oligarchies not infrequently has reduced to poverty men of no ignoble quality."
"It surely has."
"And there they sit, I fancy, within the city, furnished with stings, that is, arms, some burdened with debt, others disfranchised, others both, hating and conspiring against the acquirers of their estates and the rest of the citizens, and eager for revolution."
"'Tis so."
"But these money-makers with down-bent heads, pretending not even to see them, but inserting the sting of their money into any of the remainder who do not resist, and harvesting from them in interest as it were a manifold progeny of the parent sum, foster the drone and pauper element in the state."
"They do indeed multiply it," he said.
"And they are not willing to quench the evil as it bursts into flame either by way of a law prohibiting a man from doing as he likes with his own, or in this way, by a second law that does away with such abuses."
"What law?"
"The law that is next best, and compels the citizens to pay heed to virtue.
For if a law commanded that most voluntary contracts should be at the contractor's risk, the pursuit of wealth would be less shameless in the state and fewer of the evils of which we spoke just now would grow up there."
"Much fewer," he said.
"But as it is, and for all these reasons, this is the plight to which the rulers in the state reduce their subjects, and as for themselves and their off-spring, do they not make the young spoiled wantons averse to toil of body and mind, and too soft to stand up against pleasure and pain, and mere idlers?"
"Surely."
"And do they not fasten upon themselves the habit of neglect of everything except the making of money, and as complete an indifference to virtue as the paupers exhibit?"
"Little they care."
"And when, thus conditioned, the rulers and the ruled are brought together on the march, in wayfaring, or in some other common undertaking, either a religious festival, or a campaign, or as shipmates or fellow-soldiers or, for that matter, in actual battle, and observe one another, then the poor are not in the least scorned by the rich, but on the contrary,
do you not suppose it often happens that when a lean, sinewy, sunburnt pauper is stationed in battle beside a rich man bred in the shade, and burdened with superfluous flesh, and sees him panting and helpless
do you not suppose he will think that such fellows keep their wealth by the cowardice of the poor,
and that when the latter are together in private, one will pass the word to another 'our men are good for nothing'?"
"Nay, I know very well that they do," said he.
"And just as an unhealthy body requires but a slight impulse from outside to fall into sickness, and sometimes, even without that, all the man is one internal war, in like manner does not the corresponding type of state need only a slight occasion, the one party bringing in allies from an oligarchical state, or the other from a democratic, to become diseased and wage war with itself, and sometimes even apart from any external impulse faction arises?"
"Most emphatically."
"And a democracy, I suppose, comes into being when the poor, winning the victory, put to death some of the other party, drive out others, and grant the rest of the citizens an equal share in both citizenship and offices and for the most part these offices are assigned by lot."
"Why, yes," he said, "that is the constitution of democracy alike whether it is established by force of arms or by terrorism resulting in the withdrawal of one of the parties."
"What, then," said I, "is the manner of their life
and what is the quality of such a constitution?
For it is plain that the man of this quality will turn out to be a democratic sort of man."
"It is plain," he said.
"To begin with, are they not free?
and is not the city chock-full of liberty and freedom of speech?
and has not every man licence to do as he likes?"
"So it is said," he replied.
"And where there is such licence, it is obvious that everyone would arrange a plan for leading his own life in the way that pleases him."
"Obvious."
"All sorts and conditions of men, then, would arise in this polity more than in any other?"
"Of course."
"Possibly," said I, "this is the most beautiful of polities as a garment of many colors, embroidered with all kinds of hues, so this, decked and diversified with every type of character, would appear the most beautiful.
And perhaps," I said, "many would judge it to be the most beautiful, like boys and women when they see bright-colored things."
"Yes indeed," he said.
"Yes," said I, "and it is the fit place, my good friend, in which to look for a constitution."
"Why so?"
"Because, owing to this licence, it includes all kinds, and it seems likely that anyone who wishes to organize a state, as we were just now doing, must find his way to a democratic city and select the model that pleases him, as if in a bazaar of constitutions, and after making his choice, establish his own."
"Perhaps at any rate," he said, "he would not be at a loss for patterns."
"And the freedom from all compulsion to hold office in such a city, even if you are qualified, or again, to submit to rule, unless you please, or to make war when the rest are at war, or to keep the peace when the others do so, unless you desire peace; and again, the liberty, in defiance of any law that forbids you, to hold office and sit on juries none the less, if it occurs to you to do so, is not all that a heavenly and delicious entertainment for the time being?"
"Perhaps," he said, "for so long."
"And is not the placability of some convicted criminals exquisite?
Or have you never seen in such a state men condemned to death or exile who none the less stay on, and go to and fro among the people, and as if no one saw or heeded him, the man slips in and out like a revenant?"
"Yes, many," he said.
"And the tolerance of democracy, its superiority to all our meticulous requirements, its disdain or our solemn pronouncements made when we were founding our city, that except in the case of transcendent natural gifts no one could ever become a good man unless from childhood his play and all his pursuits were concerned with things fair and good,
how superbly it tramples under foot all such ideals, caring nothing from what practices and way of life a man turns to politics, but honoring him if only he says that he loves the people!"
"It is a noble polity, indeed!" he said.
"These and qualities akin to these democracy would exhibit, and it would, it seems, be a delightful form of government, anarchic and motley, assigning a kind of equality indiscriminately to equals and unequals alike!"
"Yes," he said, "everybody knows that."
"Observe, then, the corresponding private character.
Or must we first, as in the case of the polity, consider the origin of the type?"
"Yes," he said.
"Is not this, then, the way of it?
Our thrifty oligarchical man would have a son bred in his father's ways."
"Why not?"
"And he, too, would control by force all his appetites for pleasure that are wasters and not winners of wealth, those which are denominated unnecessary."
"Obviously."
"And in order not to argue in the dark, shall we first define our distinction between necessary and unnecessary appetites?"
"Let us do so."
"Well, then, desires that we cannot divert or suppress may be properly called necessary, and likewise those whose satisfaction is beneficial to us, may they not?
For our nature compels us to seek their satisfaction. Is not that so ?"
"Most assuredly."
"Then we shall rightly use the word 'necessary' of them?"
"Rightly."
"And what of the desires from which a man could free himself by discipline from youth up, and whose presence in the soul does no good and in some cases harm?
Should we not fairly call all such unnecessary?"
"Fairly indeed."
"Let us select an example of either kind, so that we may apprehend the type."
"Let us do so."
"Would not the desire of eating to keep in health and condition and the appetite for mere bread and relishes be necessary?"
"I think so."
"The appetite for bread is necessary in both respects, in that it is beneficial and in that if it fails we die."
"Yes."
"And the desire for relishes, so far as it conduces to fitness?"
"By all means."
"And should we not rightly pronounce unnecessary the appetite that exceeds these and seeks other varieties of food, and that by correction and training from youth up can be got rid of in most cases and is harmful to the body and a hindrance to the soul's attainment of intelligence and sobriety?"
"Nay, most rightly."
"And may we not call the one group the spendthrift desires and the other the profitable, because they help production?"
"Surely."
"And we shall say the same of sexual and other appetites?"
"The same."
"And were we not saying that the man whom we nicknamed the drone is the man who teems with such pleasures and appetites, and who is governed by his unnecessary desires, while the one who is ruled by his necessary appetites is the thrifty oligarchical man?"
"Why, surely."
"To return, then," said I, "we have to tell how the democratic man develops from the oligarchical type.
I think it is usually in this way."
"How?"
"When a youth, bred in the illiberal and niggardly fashion that we were describing, gets a taste of the honey of the drones and associates with fierce and cunning creatures who know how to purvey pleasures of every kind and variety and condition,
there you must doubtless conceive is the beginning of the transformation of the oligarchy in his soul into democracy."
"Quite inevitably," he said.
"May we not say that just as the revolution in the city was brought about by the aid of an alliance from outside, coming to the support of the similar and corresponding party in the state, so the youth is revolutionized when a like and kindred group of appetites from outside comes to the aid of one of the parties in his soul?"
"By all means," he said.
"And if, I take it, a counter-alliance comes to the rescue of the oligarchical part of his soul, either it may be from his father or from his other kin, who admonish and reproach him, then there arises faction and counter-faction and internal strife in the man with himself."
"Surely."
"And sometimes, I suppose, the democratic element retires before the oligarchical, some of its appetites having been destroyed and others expelled, and a sense of awe and reverence grows up in the young man's soul and order is restored."
"That sometimes happens," he said.
"And sometimes, again, another brood of desires akin to those expelled are stealthily nurtured to take their place, owing to the father's ignorance of true education, and wax numerous and strong."
"Yes, that is wont to be the way of it."
"And they tug and pull back to the same associations and in secret intercourse engender a multitude."
"Yes indeed."
"And in the end, I suppose, they seize the citadel of the young man's soul, finding it empty and unoccupied by studies and honorable pursuits and true discourses, which are the best watchmen and guardians in the minds of men who are dear to the gods."
"Much the best," he said.
"And then false and braggart words and opinions charge up the height and take their place and occupy that part of such a youth."
"They do indeed."
"And then he returns, does he not, to those Lotus-eaters and without disguise lives openly with them.
And if any support comes from his kin to the thrifty element in his soul, those braggart discourses close the gates of the royal fortress within him and refuse admission to the auxiliary force itself, and will not grant audience as to envoys to the words of older friends in private life.
And they themselves prevail in the conflict, and naming reverence and awe 'folly' thrust it forth, a dishonored fugitive.
And temperance they call 'want of manhood' and banish it with contumely, and they teach that moderation and orderly expenditure are 'rusticity' and 'illiberality,' and they combine with a gang of unprofitable and harmful appetites to drive them over the border."
"They do indeed."
"And when they have emptied and purged of all these the soul of the youth that they have thus possessed and occupied, and whom they are initiating with these magnificent and costly rites,
they proceed to lead home from exile insolence and anarchy and prodigality and shamelessness, resplendent in a great attendant choir and crowned with garlands,
and in celebration of their praises they euphemistically denominate insolence 'good breeding,' licence 'liberty,' prodigality 'magnificence,' and shamelessness 'manly spirit.'
And is it not in some such way as this," said I, "that in his youth the transformation takes place from the restriction to necessary desires in his education to the liberation and release of his unnecessary and harmful desires?"
"Yes, your description is most vivid," said he.
"Then, in his subsequent life, I take it, such a one expends money and toil and time no more on his necessary than on his unnecessary pleasures.
But if it is his good fortune that the period of storm and stress does not last too long, and as he grows older the fiercest tumult within him passes, and he receives back a part of the banished elements and does not abandon himself altogether to the invasion of the others,
then he establishes and maintains all his pleasures on a footing of equality, forsooth, and so lives turning over the guard-house of his soul to each as it happens along until it is sated, as if it had drawn the lot for that office, and then in turn to another, disdaining none but fostering them all equally."
"Quite so."
"And he does not accept or admit into the guard-house the words of truth when anyone tells him that some pleasures arise from honorable and good desires, and others from those that are base, and that we ought to practise and esteem the one and control and subdue the others;
but he shakes his head at all such admonitions and avers that they are all alike and to be equally esteemed."
"Such is indeed his state of mind and his conduct."
"And does he not," said I, "also live out his life in this fashion, day by day indulging the appetite of the day, now wine-bibbing and abandoning himself to the lascivious pleasing of the flute and again drinking only water and dieting; and at one time exercising his body, and sometimes idling and neglecting all things, and at another time seeming to occupy himself with philosophy.
And frequently he goes in for politics and bounces up and says and does whatever enters his head.
And if military men excite his emulation, thither he rushes, and if moneyed men, to that he turns,
and there is no order or compulsion in his existence,
but he calls this life of his the life of pleasure and freedom and happiness and cleaves to it to the end."
"That is a perfect description," he said, "of a devotee of equality."
"I certainly think," said I, "that he is a manifold man stuffed with most excellent differences, and that like that city he is the fair and many-colored one whom many a man and woman would count fortunate in his life, as containing within himself the greatest number of patterns of constitutions and qualities."
"Yes, that is so," he said.
"Shall we definitely assert, then, that such a man is to be ranged with democracy and would properly be designated as democratic?"
"Let that be his place," he said.
"And now," said I, "the fairest polity and the fairest man remain for us to describe, the tyranny and the tyrant."
"Certainly," he said.
"Come then, tell me, dear friend, how tyranny arises.
That it is an outgrowth of democracy is fairly plain."
"Yes, plain."
"Is it, then, in a sense, in the same way in which democracy arises out of oligarchy that tyranny arises from democracy?"
"How is that?"
"The good that they proposed to themselves and that was the cause of the establishment of oligarchy it was wealth, was it not?"
"Yes."
"Well, then, the insatiate lust for wealth and the neglect of everything else for the sake of money-making was the cause of its undoing."
"True," he said.
"And is not the avidity of democracy for that which is its definition and criterion of good the thing which dissolves it too?"
"What do you say its criterion to be?"
"Liberty," I replied;
"for you may hear it said that this is best managed in a democratic city, and for this reason that is the only city in which a man of free spirit will care to live."
"Why, yes," he replied, "you hear that saying everywhere."
"Then, as I was about to observe, is it not the excess and greed of this and the neglect of all other things that revolutionizes this constitution too and prepares the way for the necessity of a dictatorship?"
"How?"
he said.
"Why, when a democratic city athirst for liberty gets bad cupbearers for its leaders and is intoxicated by drinking too deep of that unmixed wine, and then, if its so-called governors are not extremely mild and gentle with it and do not dispense the liberty unstintedly,it chastises them and accuses them of being accursed oligarchs."
"Yes, that is what they do," he replied.
"But those who obey the rulers," I said, "it reviles as willing slaves and men of naught, but it commends and honors in public and private rulers who resemble subjects and subjects who are like rulers.
Is it not inevitable that in such a state the spirit of liberty should go to all lengths?"
"Of course."
"And this anarchical temper," said I, "my friend, must penetrate into private homes and finally enter into the very animals."
"Just what do we mean by that?" he said.
"Why," I said, "the father habitually tries to resemble the child and is afraid of his sons, and the son likens himself to the father and feels no awe or fear of his parents, so that he may be forsooth a free man.
And the resident alien feels himself equal to the citizen and the citizen to him, and the foreigner likewise."
"Yes, these things do happen," he said.
"They do," said I, "and such other trifles as these.
The teacher in such case fears and fawns upon the pupils, and the pupils pay no heed to the teacher or to their overseers either.
And in general the young ape their elders and vie with them in speech and action, while the old, accommodating themselves to the young, are full of pleasantry and graciousness, imitating the young for fear they may be thought disagreeable and authoritative."
"By all means," he said.
"And the climax of popular liberty, my friend," I said, "is attained in such a city when the purchased slaves, male and female, are no less free than the owners who paid for them.
And I almost forgot to mention the spirit of freedom and equal rights in the relation of men to women and women to men."
"Shall we not, then," said he, "in Aeschylean phrase, say "whatever rises to our lips'?"
"Certainly," I said, "so I will.
Without experience of it no one would believe how much freer the very beasts subject to men are in such a city than elsewhere.
The dogs literally verify the adage and 'like their mistresses become.' And likewise the horses and asses are wont to hold on their way with the utmost freedom and dignity, bumping into everyone who meets them and who does not step aside.
And so all things everywhere are just bursting with the spirit of liberty."
"It is my own dream you are telling me," he said; "for it often happens to me when I go to the country."
"And do you note that the sum total of all these items when footed up is that they render the souls of the citizens so sensitive that they chafe at the slightest suggestion of servitude and will not endure it?
For you are aware that they finally pay no heed even to the laws written or unwritten, so that forsooth they may have no master anywhere over them."
"I know it very well," said he.
"This, then, my friend," said I, "is the fine and vigorous root from which tyranny grows, in my opinion."
"Vigorous indeed," he said; "but what next?"
"The same malady," I said, "that, arising in oligarchy, destroyed it, this more widely diffused and more violent as a result of this licence, enslaves democracy.
And in truth, any excess is wont to bring about a corresponding reaction to the opposite in the seasons, in plants, in animal bodies, and most especially in political societies."
"Probably," he said.
"And so the probable outcome of too much freedom is only too much slavery in the individual and the state."
"Yes, that is probable."
"Probably, then, tyranny develops out of no other constitution than democracy from the height of liberty, I take it, the fiercest extreme of servitude."
"That is reasonable," he said.
"That, however, I believe, was not your question, but what identical malady arising in democracy as well as in oligarchy enslaves it?"
"You say truly," he replied.
"That then," I said, "was what I had in mind, the class of idle and spendthrift men, the most enterprising and vigorous portion being leaders and the less manly spirits followers.
We were likening them to drones, some equipped with stings and others stingless."
"And rightly too," he said.
"These two kinds, then," I said, "when they arise in any state, create a disturbance like that produced in the body by phlegm and gall.
And so a good physician and lawgiver must be on his guard from afar against the two kinds, like a prudent apiarist, first and chiefly to prevent their springing up, but if they do arise to have them as quickly as may be cut out, cells and all."
"Yes, by Zeus," he said, "by all means."
"Then let us take it in this way," I said, "so that we may contemplate our purpose more distinctly."
"How?"
"Let us in our theory make a tripartite division of the democratic state, which is in fact its structure.
One such class, as we have described, grows up in it because of the licence, no less than in the oligarchic state."
"That is so."
"But it is far fiercer in this state than in that."
"How so?"
"There, because it is not held in honor, but is kept out of office, it is not exercised and does not grow vigorous.
But in a democracy this is the dominating class, with rare exceptions, and the fiercest part of it makes speeches and transacts business, and the remainder swarms and settles about the speaker's stand and keeps up a buzzing and tolerates no dissent, so that everything with slight exceptions is administered by that class in such a state."
"Quite so," he said.
"And so from time to time there emerges or is secreted from the multitude another group of this sort."
"What sort?"
"When all are pursuing wealth the most orderly and thrifty natures for the most part become the richest."
"It is likely."
"Then they are the most abundant supply of honey for the drones, and it is the easiest to extract."
"Why, yes," he said, "how could one squeeze it out of those who have little?"
"The capitalistic class is, I take it, the name by which they are designated the pasture of the drones."
"Pretty much so," he said.
"And the third class, composing the 'people,' would comprise all quiet cultivators of their own farms who possess little property.
This is the largest and most potent group in a democracy when it meets in assembly."
"Yes, it is," he said, "but it will not often do that, unless it gets a share of the honey."
"Well, does it not always share," I said, "to the extent that the men at the head find it possible, in distributing to the people what they take from the well-to-do, to keep the lion's share for themselves?"
"Why, yes," he said, "it shares in that sense."
"And so, I suppose, those who are thus plundered are compelled to defend themselves by speeches in the assembly and any action in their power."
"Of course."
"And thereupon the charge is brought against them by the other party, though they may have no revolutionary designs, that they are plotting against the people, and it is said that they are oligarchs."
"Surely."
"And then finally, when they see the people, not of its own will but through misapprehension, and being misled by the calumniators, attempting to wrong them, why then, whether they wish it or not, they become in very deed oligarchs, not willingly, but this evil too is engendered by those drones which sting them."
"Precisely."
"And then there ensue impeachments and judgements and lawsuits on either side."
"Yes, indeed."
"And is it not always the way of a demos to put forward one man as its special champion and protector and cherish and magnify him?"
"Yes, it is."
"This, then, is plain," said I, "that when a tyrant arises he sprouts from a protectorate root and from nothing else."
"Very plain."
"What, then, is the starting-point of the transformation of a protector into a tyrant?
Is it not obviously when the protector's acts begin to reproduce the legend that is told of the shrine of Lycaean Zeus in Arcadia?"
"What is that?"
he said.
"The story goes that he who tastes of the one bit of human entrails minced up with those of other victims is inevitably transformed into a wolf.
Have you not heard the tale?"
"I have."
"And is it not true that in like manner a leader of the people who, getting control of a docile mob, does not withhold his hand from the shedding of tribal blood,
but by the customary unjust accusations brings a citizen into court and assassinates him, blotting out a human life,
and with unhallowed tongue and lips that have tasted kindred blood, banishes and slays and hints at the abolition of debts and the partition of lands
is it not the inevitable consequence and a decree of fate that such a one be either slain by his enemies or become a tyrant and be transformed from a man into a wolf?"
"It is quite inevitable," he said.
"He it is," I said, "who becomes the leader of faction against the possessors of property."
"Yes, he."
"May it not happen that he is driven into exile and, being restored in defiance of his enemies, returns a finished tyrant?"
"Obviously."
"And if they are unable to expel him or bring about his death by calumniating him to the people, they plot to assassinate him by stealth."
"That is certainly wont to happen," said he.
"And thereupon those who have reached this stage devise that famous petition of the tyrant to ask from the people a bodyguard to make their city safe for the friend of democracy."
"They do indeed," he said.
"And the people grant it, I suppose, fearing for him but unconcerned for themselves."
"Yes, indeed."
"And when he sees this, the man who has wealth and with his wealth the repute of hostility to democracy, then in the words of the oracle delivered to Croesus,
"By the pebble-strewn strand of the Hermos Swift is his flight, he stays not nor blushes to show the white feather."
"No, for he would never get a second chance to blush."
"And he who is caught, methinks, is delivered to his death."
"Inevitably."
"And then obviously that protector does not lie prostrate, "'mighty with far-flung limbs,'"
but overthrowing many others towers in the car of state transformed from a protector into a perfect and finished tyrant."
"What else is likely?"
he said.
"Shall we, then, portray the happiness," said I, "of the man and the state in which such a creature arises?"
"By all means let us describe it," he said.
"Then at the start and in the first days does he not smile upon all men and greet everybody he meets and deny that he is a tyrant, and promise many things in private and public, and having freed men from debts, and distributed lands to the people and his own associates, he affects a gracious and gentle manner to all?"
"Necessarily," he said.
"But when, I suppose, he has come to terms with some of his exiled enemies and has got others destroyed and is no longer disturbed by them, in the first place he is always stirring up some war so that the people may be in need of a leader."
"That is likely."
"And also that being impoverished by war-taxes they may have to devote themselves to their daily business and be less likely to plot against him?"
"Obviously."
"And if, I presume, he suspects that there are free spirits who will not suffer his domination, his further object is to find pretexts for destroying them by exposing them to the enemy?
From all these motives a tyrant is compelled to be always provoking wars?"
"Yes, he is compelled to do so."
"And by such conduct will he not the more readily incur the hostility of the citizens?"
"Of course."
"And is it not likely that some of those who helped to establish and now share in his power, voicing their disapproval of the course of events, will speak out frankly to him and to one another such of them as happen to be the bravest?"
"Yes, it is likely."
"Then the tyrant must do away with all such if he is to maintain his rule, until he has left no one of any worth, friend or foe."
"Obviously."
"He must look sharp to see, then, who is brave, who is great-souled, who is wise, who is rich and such is his good fortune that, whether he wishes it or not, he must be their enemy and plot against them all until he purge the city."
"A fine purgation," he said.
"Yes," said I, "just the opposite of that which physicians practise on our bodies.
For while they remove the worst and leave the best, he does the reverse."
"Yes, for apparently he must, he said, "if he is to keep his power."
"Blessed, then, is the necessity that binds him," said I, "which bids him dwell for the most part with base companions who hate him, or else forfeit his life."
"Such it is," he said.
"And would he not, the more he offends the citizens by such conduct, have the greater need of more and more trustworthy bodyguards?"
"Of course."
"Whom, then, may he trust,
and whence shall he fetch them?"
"Unbidden," he said, "they will wing their way to him in great numbers if he furnish their wage."
"Drones, by the dog," I said, "I think you are talking of again, an alien and motley crew."
"You think rightly," he said.
"But what of the home supply, would he not choose to employ that?"
"How?"
"By taking their slaves from the citizens, emancipating them and enlisting them in his bodyguard."
"Assuredly," he said, "since these are those whom he can most trust."
"Truly," said I, "this tyrant business is a blessed thing on your showing, if such are the friends and 'trusties' he must employ after destroying his former associates."
"But such are indeed those he does make use of," he said.
"And these companions admire him," I said, "and these new citizens are his associates, while the better sort hate and avoid him."
"Why should they not?"
"Not for nothing," said I, "is tragedy in general esteemed wise, and Euripides beyond other tragedians."
"Why, pray?"
"Because among other utterances of pregnant thought he said, 'Tyrants are wise by converse with the wise.' He meant evidently that these associates of the tyrant are the wise."
"Yes, he and the other poets," he said, "call the tyrant's power 'likest God's' and praise it in many other ways."
"Wherefore," said I, "being wise as they are, the poets of tragedy will pardon us and those whose politics resemble ours for not admitting them into our polity, since they hymn the praises of tyranny."
"I think," he said, "that the subtle minds among them will pardon us."
"But going about to other cities, I fancy, collecting crowds and hiring fine, loud, persuasive voices, they draw the polities towards tyrannies or democracies."
"Yes, indeed."
"And, further, they are paid and honored for this, chiefly, as is to be expected, by tyrants, and secondly by democracy.
But the higher they go, breasting constitution hill, the more their honor fails, as it were from lack of breath unable to proceed."
"Quite so."
"But this," said I, "is a digression.
Let us return to that fair, multitudinous, diversified and ever-changing bodyguard of the tyrant and tell how it will be supported."
"Obviously," he said, "if there are sacred treasures in the city he will spend these as long as they last and the property of those he has destroyed, thus requiring smaller contributions from the populace."
"But what when these resources fail?"
"Clearly," he said, "his father's estate will have to support him and his wassailers, his fellows and his she-fellows."
"I understand," I said, "that the people which begot the tyrant will have to feed him and his companions."
"It cannot escape from that," he said.
"And what have you to say,"
I said,
"in case the people protests and says that it is not right that a grown-up son should be supported by his father,
but the reverse, and that it did not beget and establish him in order that, when he had grown great, it, in servitude to its own slaves, should feed him and the slaves together with a nondescript rabble of aliens,
but in order that, with him for protector, it might be liberated from the rule of the rich and the so-called 'better classes,' and that it now bids him and his crew depart from the city as a father expels from his house a son together with troublesome revellers?"
"The demos, by Zeus," he said, "will then learn to its cost what it is and what a creature it begot and cherished and bred to greatness, and that in its weakness it tries to expel the stronger."
"What do you mean?" said I;
"will the tyrant dare to use force against his father, and, if he does not yield, to strike him?"
"Yes," he said, "after he has once taken from him his arms."
"A very parricide," said I, "you make the tyrant out to be, and a cruel nurse of old age, and, as it seems, this is at last tyranny open and avowed, and, as the saying goes, the demos trying to escape the smoke of submission to the free would have plunged into the fire of enslavement to slaves, and in exchange for that excessive and unseasonable liberty has clothed itself in the garb of the most cruel and bitter servile servitude."
"Yes indeed," he said, "that is just what happens."
"Well, then,"
said I,
"shall we not be fairly justified in saying that we have sufficiently described the transformation of a democracy into a tyranny and the nature of the tyranny itself?"
"Quite sufficiently," he said.
"There remains for consideration," said I, "the tyrannical man himself the manner of his development out of the democratic type and his character and the quality of his life, whether wretched or happy."
"Why, yes, he still remains," he said.
"Do you know, then, what it is that I still miss?"
"What?"
"In the matter of our desires I do not think we sufficiently distinguished their nature and number.
And so long as this is lacking our inquiry will lack clearness."
"Well," said he, "will our consideration of them not still be opportune?"
"By all means.
And observe what it is about them that I wish to consider.
It is this.
Of our unnecessary pleasures and appetites there are some lawless ones, I think, which probably are to be found in us all, but which, when controlled by the laws and the better desires in alliance with reason, can in some men be altogether got rid of, or so nearly so that only a few weak ones remain, while in others the remnant is stronger and more numerous."
"What desires do you mean?" he said.
"Those," said I, "that are awakened in sleep when the rest of the soul, the rational, gentle and dominant part, slumbers, but the beastly and savage part, replete with food and wine, gambols and, repelling sleep, endeavors to sally forth and satisfy its own instincts.
You are aware that in such case there is nothing it will not venture to undertake as being released from all sense of shame and all reason.
It does not shrink from attempting to lie with a mother in fancy or with anyone else, man, god or brute.
It is ready for any foul deed of blood;
it abstains from no food, and, in a word, falls short of no extreme of folly and shamelessness."
"Most true," he said.
"But when, I suppose, a man's condition is healthy and sober, and he goes to sleep after arousing his rational part and entertaining it with fair words and thoughts, and attaining to clear self-consciousness,
while he has neither starved nor indulged to repletion his appetitive part, so that it may be lulled to sleep and not disturb the better part by its pleasure or pain,
but may suffer that in isolated purity to examine and reach out towards and apprehend some of the things unknown to it, past, present or future
and when he has in like manner tamed his passionate part, and does not after a quarrel fall asleep with anger still awake within him,
but if he has thus quieted the two elements in his soul and quickened the third, in which reason resides, and so goes to his rest,
you are aware that in such case he is most likely to apprehend truth, and the visions of his dreams are least likely to be lawless."
"I certainly think so," he said.
"This description has carried us too far, but the point that we have to notice is this, that in fact there exists in every one of us, even in some reputed most respectable, a terrible, fierce and lawless brood of desires, which it seems are revealed in our sleep.
Consider, then, whether there is anything in what I say, and whether you admit it."
"Well, I do admit it."
"Now recall our characterization of the democratic man.
His development was determined by his education from youth under a thrifty father who approved only the acquisitive appetites and disapproved the unnecessary ones whose object is entertainment and display. Is not that so?"
"Yes."
"And by association with more sophisticated men, teeming with the appetites we have just described, he is impelled towards every form of insolence and outrage, and to the adoption of their way of life by his hatred of his father's niggardliness.
But since his nature is better than that of his corrupters, being drawn both ways he settles down in a compromise between the two tendencies, and indulging and enjoying each in moderation, forsooth, as he supposes,
he lives what he deems a life that is neither illiberal nor lawless, now transformed from an oligarch to a democrat."
"That was and is our belief about this type."
"Assume, then, again," said I, "that such a man when he is older has a son bred in turn in his ways of life."
"I so assume."
"And suppose the experience of his father to be repeated in his case.
He is drawn toward utter lawlessness, which is called by his seducers complete freedom.
His father and his other kin lend support to these compromise appetites while the others lend theirs to the opposite group.
And when these dread magi and king-makers come to realize that they have no hope of controlling the youth in any other way, they contrive to engender in his soul a ruling passion to be the protector of his idle and prodigal appetites, a monstrous winged drone.
Or do you think the spirit of desire in such men is aught else?"
"Nothing but that," he said.
"And when the other appetites, buzzing about it, replete with incense and myrrh and chaplets and wine, and the pleasures that are released in such revelries, magnifying and fostering it to the utmost, awaken in the drone the sting of unsatisfied yearnings,
why then this protector of the soul has madness for his body-guard and runs amuck,
and if it finds in the man any opinions or appetites accounted worthy and still capable of shame,
it slays them and thrusts them forth until it purges him of sobriety, and fills and infects him with frenzy brought in from outside."
"A perfect description," he said, "of the generation of the tyrannical man."
"And is not this analogy," said I, "the reason why Love has long since been called a tyrant?"
"That may well be," he said.
"And does not a drunken man, my friend," I said, "have something of this tyrannical temper?"
"Yes, he has."
"And again the madman, the deranged man, attempts and expects to rule over not only men but gods."
"Yes indeed, he does," he said.
"Then a man becomes tyrannical in the full sense of the word, my friend," I said, "when either by nature or by habits or by both he has become even as the drunken, the erotic, the maniacal."
"Assuredly."
"Such, it seems, is his origin and character, but what is his manner of life?"
"As the wits say, you shall tell me."
"I do," I said;
"for, I take it, next there are among them feasts and carousals and revellings and courtesans and all the doings of those whose souls are entirely swayed by the indwelling tyrant Eros."
"Inevitably," he said.
"And do not many and dread appetites shoot up beside this master passion every day and night in need of many things?"
"Many indeed."
"And so any revenues there may be are quickly expended."
"Of course."
"And after this there are borrowings and levyings upon the estate?"
"Of course."
"And when all these resources fail, must there not come a cry from the frequent and fierce nestlings of desire hatched in his soul, and must not such men, urged, as it were by goads, by the other desires, and especially by the ruling passion itself as captain of their bodyguard to keep up the figure must they not run wild and look to see who has aught that can be taken from him by deceit or violence?"
"Most certainly."
"And so he is compelled to sweep it in from every source or else be afflicted with great travail and pain."
"He is compelled."
"And just as the new, upspringing pleasures in him got the better of the original passions of his soul and robbed them, so he himself, though younger, will claim the right to get the better of his father and mother, and, after spending his own share, to seize and convert to his own use a portion of his father's estate."
"Of course," he said, "what else?"
"And if they resist him, would he not at first attempt to rob and steal from his parents and deceive them?"
"Certainly."
"And if he failed in that, would he not next seize it by force?"
"I think so," he said.
"And then, good sir, if the old man and the old woman clung to it and resisted him, would he be careful to refrain from the acts of a tyrant?"
"I am not without my fears," he said, "for the parents of such a one."
"Nay, Adeimantus, in heaven's name, do you suppose that, for the sake of a newly found belle amie bound to him by no necessary tie, such a one would strike the dear mother, his by necessity and from his birth?
Or for the sake of a blooming new-found bel ami, not necessary to his life, he would rain blows upon the aged father past his prime, closest of his kin and oldest of his friends?
And would he subject them to those new favorites if he brought them under the same roof?"
"Yes, by Zeus," he said.
"A most blessed lot it seems to be," said I, "to be the parent of a tyrant son."
"It does indeed," he said.
"And again, when the resources of his father and mother are exhausted and fail such a one, and the swarm of pleasures collected in his soul is grown great,
will he not first lay hands on the wall of someone's house or the cloak of someone who walks late at night, and thereafter he will make a clean sweep of some temple,
and in all these actions the beliefs which he held from boyhood about the honorable and the base, the opinions accounted just, will be overmastered by the opinions newly emancipated and released, which, serving as bodyguards of the ruling passion, will prevail in alliance with it
I mean the opinions that formerly were freed from restraint in sleep,
when, being still under the control of his father and the laws, he maintained the democratic constitution in his soul.
But now, when under the tyranny of his ruling passion, he is continuously and in waking hours what he rarely became in sleep,
and he will refrain from no atrocity of murder nor from any food or deed,
but the passion that dwells in him as a tyrant will live in utmost anarchy and lawlessness,
and, since it is itself sole autocrat, will urge the polity, so to speak, of him in whom it dwells to dare anything and everything in order to find support for himself and the hubbub of his henchmen, in part introduced from outside by evil associations, and in part released and liberated within by the same habits of life as his.
Is not this the life of such a one?"
"It is this," he said.
"And if," I said, "there are only a few of this kind in a city, and the others, the multitude as a whole, are sober-minded, the few go forth into exile and serve some tyrant elsewhere as bodyguard or become mercenaries in any war there may be.
But if they spring up in time of peace and tranquillity they stay right there in the city and effect many small evils."
"What kind of evils do you mean?"
"Oh, they just steal, break into houses, cut purses, strip men of their garments, plunder temples, and kidnap, and if they are fluent speakers they become sycophants and bear false witness and take bribes."
"Yes, small evils indeed," he said, "if the men of this sort are few."
"Why, yes," I said, "for small evils are relatively small compared with great, and in respect of the corruption and misery of a state all of them together, as the saying goes, don't come within hail of the mischief done by a tyrant.
For when men of this sort and their followers become numerous in a state and realize their numbers, then it is they who, in conjunction with the folly of the people, create a tyrant out of that one of them who has the greatest and mightiest tyrant in his own soul."
"Naturally," he said, "for he would be the most tyrannical."
"Then if the people yield willingly 'tis well, but if the city resists him, then, just as in the previous case the man chastized his mother and his father, so now in turn will he chastize his fatherland if he can, bringing in new boon companions beneath whose sway he will hold and keep enslaved his once dear motherland as the Cretans name her and fatherland.
And this would be the end of such a man's desire."
"Yes," he said, "this, just this."
"Then," said I, "is not this the character of such men in private life and before they rule the state: to begin with they associate with flatterers, who are ready to do anything to serve them, or, if they themselves want something, they themselves fawn and shrink from no contortion or abasement in protest of their friendship, though, once the object gained, they sing another tune."
"Yes indeed," he said.
"Throughout their lives, then, they never know what it is to be the friends of anybody.
They are always either masters or slaves, but the tyrannical nature never tastes freedom or true friendship."
"Quite so."
"May we not rightly call such men faithless?"
"Of course."
"Yes, and unjust to the last degree, if we were right in our previous agreement about the nature of justice."
"But surely," he said, "we were right."
"Let us sum up, then," said I, "the most evil type of man.
He is, I presume, the man who, in his waking hours, has the qualities we found in his dream state."
"Quite so."
"And he is developed from the man who, being by nature most of a tyrant, achieves sole power, and the longer he lives as an actual tyrant the stronger this quality becomes."
"Inevitably," said Glaucon, taking up the argument.
"And shall we find," said I, "that the man who is shown to be the most evil will also be the most miserable,
and the man who is most of a tyrant for the longest time is most and longest miserable in sober truth?
Yet the many have many opinions."
"That much, certainly," he said, "must needs be true."
"Does not the tyrannical man," said I, "correspond to the tyrannical state in similitude, the democratic to the democratic and the others likewise?"
"Surely."
"And may we not infer that the relation of state to state in respect of virtue and happiness is the same as that of the man to the man?"
"Of course."
"What is, then, in respect of virtue, the relation of a city ruled by a tyrant to a royal city as we first described it?"
"They are direct contraries," he said; "the one is the best, the other the worst."
"I'll not ask which is which," I said, "because that is obvious.
But again in respect of happiness and wretchedness, is your estimate the same or different?
And let us not be dazzled by fixing our eyes on that one man, the tyrant, or a few of his court,
but let us enter into and survey the entire city, as is right, and declare our opinion only after we have so dived to its uttermost recesses and contemplated its life as a whole."
"That is a fair challenge," he said, "and it is clear to everybody that there is no city more wretched than that in which a tyrant rules, and none more happy than that governed by a true king."
"And would it not also be a fair challenge," said I, "to ask you to accept as the only proper judge of the two men the one who is able in thought to enter with understanding into the very soul and temper of a man, and who is not like a child viewing him from outside, overawed by the tyrants' great attendance, and the pomp and circumstance which they assume in the eyes of the world, but is able to see through it all?
And what if I should assume, then, that the man to whom we ought all to listen is he who has this capacity of judgement and who has lived under the same roof with a tyrant and has witnessed his conduct in his own home and observed in person his dealings with his intimates in each instance where he would best be seen stripped of his vesture of tragedy, and who had likewise observed his behavior in the hazards of his public life
and if we should ask the man who has seen all this to be the messenger to report on the happiness or misery of the tyrant as compared with other men?"
"That also would be a most just challenge," he said.
"Shall we, then, make believe," said I, "that we are of those who are thus able to judge and who have ere now lived with tyrants, so that we may have someone to answer our questions?"
"By all means."
"Come, then," said I, "examine it thus.
Recall the general likeness between the city and the man, and then observe in turn what happens to each of them."
"What things?"
he said.
"In the first place," said I, "will you call the state governed by a tyrant free or enslaved, speaking of it as a state?"
"Utterly enslaved," he said.
"And yet you see in it masters and freemen."
"I see," he said, "a small portion of such, but the entirety, so to speak, and the best part of it, is shamefully and wretchedly enslaved."
"If, then," I said, "the man resembles the state, must not the same proportion obtain in him, and his soul teem with boundless servility and illiberality, the best and most reasonable parts of it being enslaved, while a small part, the worst and the most frenzied, plays the despot?"
"Inevitably," he said.
"Then will you say that such a soul is enslaved or free?"
"Enslaved, I should suppose."
"Again, does not the enslaved and tyrannized city least of all do what it really wishes?"
"Decidedly so."
"Then the tyrannized soul to speak of the soul as a whole also will least of all do what it wishes, but being always perforce driven and drawn by the gadfly of desire it will be full of confusion and repentance."
"Of course."
"And must the tyrannized city be rich or poor?"
"Poor."
"Then the tyrant soul also must of necessity always be needy and suffer from unfulfilled desire."
"So it is," he said.
"And again, must not such a city, as well as such a man, be full of terrors and alarms?"
"It must indeed."
"And do you think you will find more lamentations and groans and wailing and anguish in any other city?"
"By no means."
"And so of man, do you think these things will more abound in any other than in this tyrant type, that is maddened by its desires and passions?"
"How could it be so?"
he said.
"In view of all these and other like considerations, then, I take it, you judged that this city is the most miserable of cities."
"And was I not right?"
he said.
"Yes, indeed," said I.
"But of the tyrant man, what have you to say in view of these same things?"
"That he is far and away the most miserable of all," he said.
"I cannot admit," said I, "that you are right in that too."
"How so?"
said he.
"This one," said I, "I take it, has not yet attained the acme of misery."
"Then who has?"
"Perhaps you will regard the one I am about to name as still more wretched."
"What one?"
"The one," said I, "who, being of tyrannical temper, does not live out his life in private station but is so unfortunate that by some unhappy chance he is enabled to become an actual tyrant."
"I infer from what has already been said," he replied, "that you speak truly."
"Yes," said I, "but it is not enough to suppose such things.
We must examine them thoroughly by reason and an argument such as this.
For our inquiry concerns the greatest of all things, the good life or the bad life."
"Quite right," he replied.
"Consider, then, if there is anything in what I say.
For I think we must get a notion of the matter from these examples."
"From which?"
"From individual wealthy private citizens in our states who possess many slaves.
For these resemble the tyrant in being rulers over many, only the tyrant's numbers are greater."
"Yes, they are."
"You are aware, then, that they are unafraid and do not fear their slaves?"
"What should they fear?"
"Nothing," I said; "but do you perceive the reason why?"
"Yes, because the entire state is ready to defend each citizen."
"You are right," I said.
"But now suppose some god should catch up a man who has fifty or more slaves and waft him with his wife and children away from the city and set him down with his other possessions and his slaves in a solitude where no freeman could come to his rescue.
What and how great would be his fear, do you suppose, lest he and his wife and children be destroyed by the slaves?"
"The greatest in the world," he said, "if you ask me."
"And would he not forthwith find it necessary to fawn upon some of the slaves and make them many promises and emancipate them, though nothing would be further from his wish?
And so he would turn out to be the flatterer of his own servants."
"He would certainly have to," he said, "or else perish."
"But now suppose," said I, "that god established round about him numerous neighbors who would not tolerate the claim of one man to be master of another, but would inflict the utmost penalties on any such person on whom they could lay their hands."
"I think," he said, "that his plight would be still more desperate, encompassed by nothing but enemies."
"And is not that the sort of prison-house in which the tyrant is pent, being of a nature such as we have described and filled with multitudinous and manifold terrors and appetites?
Yet greedy and avid of spirit as he is, he only of the citizens may not travel abroad or view any of the sacred festivals that other freemen yearn to see, but he must live for the most part cowering in the recesses of his house like a woman, envying among the other citizens anyone who goes abroad and sees any good thing."
"Most certainly," he said.
"And does not such a harvest of ills measure the difference between the man who is merely ill-governed in his own soul, the man of tyrannical temper, whom you just now judged to be most miserable, and the man who, having this disposition, does not live out his life in private station but is constrained by some ill hap to become an actual tyrant,
and while unable to control himself attempts to rule over others,
as if a man with a sick and incontinent body should not live the private life but should be compelled to pass his days in contention and strife with other persons?"
"Your analogy is most apt and true, Socrates," he said.
"Is not that then, dear Glaucon," said I, "a most unhappy experience in every way?
And is not the tyrant's life still worse than that which was judged by you to be the worst?"
"Precisely so," he said.
"Then it is the truth, though some may deny it, that the real tyrant is really enslaved to cringings and servitudes beyond compare, a flatterer of the basest men, and that, so far from finding even the least satisfaction for his desires, he is in need of most things, and is a poor man in very truth,
as is apparent if one knows how to observe a soul in its entirety;
and throughout his life he teems with terrors and is full of convulsions and pains,
if in fact he resembles the condition of the city which he rules;
and he is like it, is he not?"
"Yes, indeed," he said.
"And in addition, shall we not further attribute to him all that we spoke of before, and say that he must needs be, and, by reason of his rule, come to be still more than he was, envious, faithless, unjust, friendless, impious, a vessel and nurse of all iniquity, and so in consequence be himself most unhappy make all about him so?"
"No man of sense will gainsay that," he said.
"Come then," said I, "now at last, even as the judge of last instance pronounces, so do you declare who in your opinion is first in happiness and who second, and similarly judge the others, all five in succession, the royal, the timocratic, the oligarchic, the democratic, and the tyrannical man."
"Nay," he said, "the decision is easy.
For as if they were choruses I judge them in the order of their entrance, and so rank them in respect of virtue and vice, happiness and its contrary."
"Shall we hire a herald, then," said I, "or shall I myself make proclamation that the son of Ariston pronounced the best man and the most righteous to be the happiest, and that he is the one who is the most kingly and a king over himself; and declared that the most evil and most unjust is the most unhappy, who again is the man who, having the most of the tyrannical temper in himself, become, most of a tyrant over himself and over the state?"
"Let it have been so proclaimed by you," he said.
"Shall I add the clause 'alike whether their character is known to all men and gods or is not known'?"
"Add that to the proclamation," he said.
"Very good," said I; "this, then, would be one of our proofs, but examine this second one and see if there is anything in it."
"What is it?"
"Since," said I, "corresponding to the three types in the city, the soul also is tripartite, it will admit, I think, of another demonstration also."
"What is that?"
"The following: The three parts have also, it appears to me, three kinds of pleasure, one peculiar to each, and similarly three appetites and controls."
"What do you mean?"
he said.
"One part, we say, is that with which a man learns, one is that with which he feels anger.
But the third part, owing to its manifold forms, we could not easily designate by any one distinctive name, but gave it the name of its chief and strongest element; for we called it the appetitive part because of the intensity of its appetites concerned with food and drink and love and their accompaniments, and likewise the money-loving part, because money is the chief instrument for the gratification of such desires."
"And rightly," he said.
"And if we should also say that its pleasure and its love were for gain or profit, should we not thus best bring it together under one head in our discourse so as to understand each other when we speak of this part of the soul, and justify our calling it the money-loving and gain-loving part?"
"I, at any rate, think so," he said.
"And, again, of the high-spirited element, do we not say that it is wholly set on predominance and victory and good repute?"
"Yes, indeed."
"And might we not appropriately designate it as the ambitious part and that which is covetous of honor?"
"Most appropriately."
"But surely it is obvious to everyone that all the endeavor of the part by which we learn is ever towards knowledge of the truth of things, and that it least of the three is concerned for wealth and reputation."
"Much the least."
"Lover of learning and lover of wisdom would be suitable designations for that."
"Quite so," he said.
"Is it not also true," I said, "that the ruling principle of men's souls is in some cases this faculty and in others one of the other two, as it may happen?"
"That is so," he said.
"And that is why we say that the primary classes of men also are three, the philosopher or lover of wisdom, the lover of victory and the lover of gain."
"Precisely so"
"And also that there are three forms of pleasure, corresponding respectively to each?"
"By all means."
"Are you aware, then" said I, "that if you should choose to ask men of these three classes, each in turn, which is the most pleasurable of these lives, each will chiefly commend his own?
The financier will affirm that in comparison with profit the pleasures of honor or of learning area of no value except in so far as they produce money."
"True," he said.
"And what of the lover of honor?"
I said;
"does he not regard the pleasure that comes from money as vulgar and low, and again that of learning, save in so far as the knowledge confers honor, mere fume and moonshine?"
"It is so," he said.
"And what," said I, "are we to suppose the philosopher thinks of the other pleasures compared with the delight of knowing the truth and the reality, and being always occupied with that while he learns?
Will he not think them far removed from true pleasure,
and call them literally the pleasures of necessity, since he would have no use for them if necessity were not laid upon him?"
"We may be sure of that," he said.
"Since, then, there is contention between the several types of pleasure and the lives themselves, not merely as to which is the more honorable or the more base, or the worse or the better, but which is actually the more pleasurable or free from pain, how could we determine which of them speaks most truly?"
"In faith, I cannot tell," he said.
"Well, consider it thus: By what are things to be judged, if they are to be judged rightly?
Is it not by experience, intelligence and discussion?
Or could anyone name a better criterion than these?"
"How could he?"
he said.
"Observe, then.
Of our three types of men, which has had the most experience of all the pleasures we mentioned?
Do you think that the lover of gain by study of the very nature of truth has more experience of the pleasure that knowledge yields than the philosopher has of that which results from gain?"
"There is a vast difference," he said;
"for the one, the philosopher, must needs taste of the other two kinds of pleasure from childhood;
but the lover of gain is not only under no necessity of tasting or experiencing the sweetness of the pleasure of learning the true natures of things, but he cannot easily do so even if he desires and is eager for it."
"The lover of wisdom, then," said I, "far surpasses the lover of gain in experience of both kinds of pleasure."
"Yes, far."
"And how does he compare with the lover of honor?
Is he more unacquainted with the pleasure of being honored than that other with that which comes from knowledge?"
"Nay, honor," he said, "if they achieve their several objects, attends them all; for the rich man is honored by many and the brave man and the wise, so that all are acquainted with the kind of pleasure that honor brings; but it is impossible for anyone except the lover of wisdom to have savored the delight that the contemplation of true being and reality brings."
"Then," said I, "so far as experience goes, he is the best judge of the three."
"By far."
"And again, he is the only one whose experience will have been accompanied by intelligence."
"Surely."
"And yet again, that which is the instrument, or , of judgement is the instrument, not of the lover of gain or of the lover of honor, but of the lover of wisdom."
"What is that?"
"It was by means of words and discussion that we said the judgement must be reached; was it not?"
"Yes."
"And they are the instrument mainly of the philosopher."
"Of course."
"Now if wealth and profit were the best criteria by which things are judged, the things praised and censured by the lover of gain would necessarily be truest and most real."
"Quite necessarily."
"And if honor, victory and courage, would it not be the things praised by the lover of honor and victory?"
"Obviously."
"But since the tests are experience and wisdom and discussion, what follows?"
"Of necessity," he said, "that the things approved by the lover of wisdom and discussion are most valid and true."
"There being, then, three kinds of pleasure, the pleasure of that part of the soul whereby we learn is the sweetest, and the life of the man in whom that part dominates is the most pleasurable."
"How could it be otherwise?"
he said.
"At any rate the man of intelligence speaks with authority when he commends his own life."
"And to what life and to what pleasure," I said, "does the judge assign the second place?"
"Obviously to that of the warrior and honor-loving type, for it is nearer to the first than is the life of the money-maker."
"And so the last place belongs to the lover of gain, as it seems."
"Surely,"
said he.
"That, then, would be two points in succession and two victories for the just man over the unjust.
And now for the third in the Olympian fashion to the saviour and to Olympian Zeus observe that other pleasure than that of the intelligence is not altogether even real or pure, but is a kind of scene-painting, as I seem to have heard from some wise man;
and yet this would be the greatest and most decisive overthrow."
"Much the greatest.
But what do you mean?"
"I shall discover it," I said, "if you will answer my questions while I seek."
"Ask, then," he said.
"Tell me, then," said I, "do we not say that pain is the opposite of pleasure?"
"We certainly do."
"And is there not such a thing as a neutral state"
"There is."
"Is it not intermediate between them, and in the mean, being a kind of quietude of the soul in these respects?
Or is not that your notion of it?"
"It is that," said he.
"Do you not recall the things men say in sickness?"
"What sort of things?"
"Why, that after all there is nothing sweeter than to be well, though they were not aware that it is the highest pleasure before they were Ill."
"I remember," he said.
"And do you not hear men afflicted with severe pain saying that there is no greater pleasure than the cessation of this suffering?"
"I do hear."
"And you perceive, I presume, many similar conditions in which men while suffering pain praise freedom from pain and relief from that as the highest pleasure, and not positive delight."
"Yes," he said, "for this in such cases is perhaps what is felt as pleasurable and acceptable peace."
"And so," I said, "when a man's delight comes to an end, the cessation of pleasure will be painful."
"It may be so," he said.
"What, then, we just now described as the intermediate state between the two this quietude will sometimes be both pain and pleasure."
"It seems so"
"Is it really possible for that which is neither to become both?"
"I think not."
"And further, both pleasure and pain arising in the soul are a kind of motion, are they not?"
"Yes."
"And did we not just now see that to feel neither pain nor pleasure is a quietude of the soul and an intermediate state between the two?"
"Yes, we did."
"How, then, can it be right to think the absence of pain pleasure, or the absence of joy painful?"
"In no way."
"This is not a reality, then, but an illusion," said I; "in such case the quietude in juxtaposition with the pain appears pleasure, and in juxtaposition with the pleasure pain.
And these illusions have no real bearing on the truth of pleasure, but are a kind of jugglery."
"So at any rate our argument signifies," he said.
"Take a look, then," said I, "at pleasures which do not follow on pain, so that you may not haply suppose for the present that it is the nature of pleasure to be a cessation from pain and pain from pleasure."
"Where shall I look," he said, "and what pleasures do you mean?"
"There are many others," I said, "and especially, if you please to note them, the pleasures connected with smell.
For these with no antecedent pain suddenly attain an indescribable intensity, and their cessation leaves no pain after them."
"Most true," he said.
"Let us not believe, then, that the riddance of pain is pure pleasure or that of pleasure pain."
"No, we must not."
"Yet, surely," said I, "the affections that find their way through the body to the soul and are called pleasures are, we may say, the most and the greatest of them, of this type, in some sort releases from pain.?"
"Yes, they are."
"And is not this also the character of the anticipatory pleasures and pains that precede them and arise from the expectation of them?"
"It is."
"Do you know, then, what their quality is and what they most resemble?"
"What?"
he said.
"Do you think that there is such a thing in nature as up and down and in the middle?"
"I do."
"Do you suppose, then, that anyone who is transported from below to the center would have any other opinion than that he was moving upward?
And if he took his stand at the center and looked in the direction from which he had been transported, do you think he would suppose himself to be anywhere but above, never having seen that which is really above?"
"No, by Zeus," he said, "I do not think that such a person would have any other notion."
"And if he were borne back," I said, "he would both think himself to be moving downward and would think truly."
"Of course."
"And would not all this happen to him because of his non-acquaintance with the true and real up and down and middle?"
"Obviously."
"Would it surprise you, then," said I, "if similarly men without experience of truth and reality hold unsound opinions about many other matters, and are so disposed towards pleasure and pain and the intermediate neutral condition that, when they are moved in the direction of the painful, they truly think themselves to be, and really are, in a state of pain,
but, when they move from pain to the middle and neutral state, they intensely believe that they are approaching fulfillment and pleasure,
and just as if, in ignorance of white, they were comparing grey with black, so, being inexperienced in true pleasure, they are deceived by viewing painlessness in its relation to pain?"
"No, by Zeus," he said, "it would not surprise me, but far rather if it were not so."
"In this way, then, consider it.
Are not hunger and thirst and similar states inanitions or emptinesses of the bodily habit?"
"Surely."
"And is not ignorance and folly in turn a kind of emptiness of the habit of the soul?"
"It is indeed."
"And he who partakes of nourishment and he who gets, wisdom fills the void and is filled?"
"Of course."
"And which is the truer filling and fulfillment, that of the less or of the more real being?"
"Evidently that of the more real."
"And which of the two groups or kinds do you think has a greater part in pure essence, the class of foods, drinks, and relishes and nourishment generally, or the kind of true opinion, knowledge and reason, and, in sum, all the things that are more excellent?
Form your judgement thus.
Which do you think more truly is, that which clings to what is ever like itself and immortal and to the truth, and that which is itself of such a nature and is born in a thing of that nature, or that which clings to what is mortal and never the same and is itself such and is born in such a thing?"
"That which cleaves to what is ever the same far surpasses," he said.
"Does the essence of that which never abides the same partake of real essence any more than of knowledge?"
"By no means."
"Or of truth and reality?"
"Not of that, either."
"And if a thing has less of truth has it not also less of real essence or existence?"
"Necessarily."
"And is it not generally true that the kinds concerned with the service of the body partake less of truth and reality than those that serve the soul?"
"Much less."
"And do you not think that the same holds of the body itself in comparison with the soul?"
"I do."
"Then is not that which is fulfilled of what more truly is, and which itself more truly is, more truly filled and satisfied than that which being itself less real is filled with more unreal things?"
"Of course."
"If, then, to be filled with what befits nature is pleasure, then that which is more really filled with real things would more really and truly cause us to enjoy a true pleasure, while that which partakes of the less truly existent would be less truly and surely filled and would partake of a less trustworthy and less true pleasure."
"Most inevitably," he said.
"Then those who have no experience of wisdom and virtue but are ever devoted to feastings and that sort of thing are swept downward, it seems, and back again to the center, and so sway and roam to and fro throughout their lives,
but they have never transcended all this and turned their eyes to the true upper region nor been wafted there, nor ever been really filled with real things, nor ever tasted stable and pure pleasure,
but with eyes ever bent upon the earth and heads bowed down over their tables they feast like cattle, grazing and copulating, ever greedy for more of these delights;
and in their greed kicking and butting one another with horns and hooves of iron they slay one another in sateless avidity,
because they are vainly striving to satisfy with things that are not real the unreal and incontinent part of their souls."
"You describe in quite oracular style, Socrates," said Glaucon, "the life of the multitude."
"And are not the pleasures with which they dwell inevitably commingled with pains, phantoms of true pleasure, illusions of scene-painting, so colored by contrary juxtaposition as to seem intense in either kind, and to beget mad loves of themselves in senseless souls, and to be fought for, as Stesichorus says the wraith of Helen was fought for at Troy through ignorance of the truth?"
"It is quite inevitable," he said, "that it should be so."
"So, again, must not the like hold of the high-spirited element, whenever a man succeeds in satisfying that part of his nature his covetousness of honor by envy, his love of victory by violence, his ill-temper by indulgence in anger, pursuing these ends without regard to consideration and reason?"
"The same sort of thing," he said, "must necessarily happen in this case too."
"Then," said I, "may we not confidently declare that in both the gain-loving and the contentious part of our nature all the desires that wait upon knowledge and reason, and, pursuing their pleasures in conjunction with them, take only those pleasures which reason approves, will, since they follow truth, enjoy the truest pleasures, so far as that is possible for them, and also the pleasures that are proper to them and their own,
if for everything that which is best may be said to be most its 'own'?"
"But indeed," he said, "it is most truly its very own."
"Then when the entire soul accepts the guidance of the wisdom-loving part and is not filled with inner dissension, the result for each part is that it in all other respects keeps to its own task and is just, and likewise that each enjoys its own proper pleasures and the best pleasures and, so far as such a thing is possible, the truest."
"Precisely so."
"And so when one of the other two gets the mastery the result for it is that it does not find its own proper pleasure and constrains the others to pursue an alien pleasure and not the true."
"That is so," he said.
"And would not that which is furthest removed from philosophy and reason be most likely to produce this effect?"
"Quite so," he said.
"And is not that furthest removed from reason which is furthest from law and order?"
"Obviously."
"And was it not made plain that the furthest removed are the erotic and tyrannical appetites?"
"Quite so."
"And least so the royal and orderly?"
"Yes."
"Then the tyrant's place, I think, will be fixed at the furthest remove from true and proper pleasure, and the king's at the least."
"Necessarily."
"Then the tyrant's life will be least pleasurable and the king's most."
"There is every necessity of that."
"Do you know, then," said I, "how much less pleasurably the tyrant lives than the king?"
"I'll know if you tell me," he said.
"There being as it appears three pleasures, one genuine and two spurious, the tyrant in his flight from law and reason crosses the border beyond the spurious, cohabits with certain slavish, mercenary pleasures, and the measure of his inferiority is not easy to express except perhaps thus."
"How?"
he said.
"The tyrant, I believe, we found at the third remove from the oligarch, for the democrat came between."
"Yes."
"And would he not also dwell with a phantom of pleasure in respect of reality three stages removed from that other, if all that we have said is true?"
"That is so."
"And the oligarch in turn is at the third remove from the royal man if we assume the identity of the aristocrat and the king."
"Yes, the third."
"Three times three, then, by numerical measure is the interval that separates the tyrant from true pleasure."
"Apparently."
"The phantom of the tyrant's pleasure is then by longitudinal mensuration a plane number."
"Quite so."
"But by squaring and cubing it is clear what the interval of this separation becomes."
"It is clear," he said, "to a reckoner."
"Then taking it the other way about, if one tries to express the extent of the interval between the king and the tyrant in respect of true pleasure he will find on completion of the multiplication that he lives times as happily and that the tyrant's life is more painful by the same distance."
"An overwhelming and baffling calculation," he said, "of the difference between the just and the unjust man in respect of pleasure and pain!"
"And what is more, it is a true number and pertinent to the lives of men if days and nights and months and years pertain to them."
"They certainly do," he said.
"Then if in point of pleasure the victory of the good and just man over the bad and unjust is so great as this, he will surpass him inconceivably in decency and beauty of life and virtue."
"Inconceivably indeed, by Zeus," he said.
"Very good," said I.
"And now that we have come to this point in the argument, let us take up again the statement with which we began and that has brought us to this pass.
It was, I believe, averred that injustice is profitable to the completely unjust man who is reputed just.
Was not that the proposition?"
"Yes, that."
"Let us, then, reason with its proponent now that we have agreed on the essential nature of injustice and just conduct."
"How?"
he said.
"By fashioning in our discourse a symbolic image of the soul, that the maintainer of that proposition may see precisely what it is that he was saying."
"What sort of an image?"
he said.
"One of those natures that the ancient fables tell of," said I, "as that of the Chimaera or Scylla or Cerberus, and the numerous other examples that are told of many forms grown together in one."
"Yes, they do tell of them."
"Mould, then, a single shape of a manifold and many-headed beast that has a ring of heads of tame and wild beasts and can change them and cause to spring forth from itself all such growths."
"It is the task of a cunning artist," he said, "but nevertheless, since speech is more plastic than wax and other such media, assume that it has been so fashioned."
"Then fashion one other form of a lion and one of a man and let the first be far the largest and the second second in size."
"That is easier," he said, "and is done."
"Join the three in one, then, so as in some sort to grow together."
"They are so united," he said.
"Then mould about them outside the likeness of one, that of the man, so that to anyone who is unable to look within but who can see only the external sheath it appears to be one living creature, the man."
"The sheath is made fast about him," he said.
"Let us, then say to the speaker who avers that it pays this man to be unjust, and that to do justice is not for his advantage, that he is affirming nothing else than that it profits him to feast and make strong the multifarious beast and the lion and all that pertains to the lion, but to starve the man and so enfeeble him that he can be pulled about whithersoever either of the others drag him, and not to familiarize or reconcile with one another the two creatures but suffer them to bite and fight and devour one another."
"Yes," he said, "that is precisely what the panegyrist of injustice will be found to say."
"And on the other hand he who says that justice is the more profitable affirms that all our actions and words should tend to give the man within us complete domination over the entire man and make him take charge of the many-headed beast like a farmer who cherishes and trains the cultivated plants but checks the growth of the wild
and he will make an ally of the lion's nature, and caring for all the beasts alike will first make them friendly to one another and to himself, and so foster their growth."
"Yes, that in turn is precisely the meaning of the man who commends justice."
"From every point of view, then, the panegyrist of justice speaks truly and the panegyrist of injustice falsely.
For whether we consider pleasure, reputation, or profit, he who commends justice speaks the truth, while there is no soundness or real knowledge of what he censures in him who disparages it."
"None whatever, I think," said he.
"Shall we, then, try to persuade him gently, for he does not willingly err, by questioning him thus: Dear friend, should we not also say that the things which law and custom deem fair or foul have been accounted so for a like reason the fair and honorable things being those that subject the brutish part of our nature to that which is human in us, or rather, it may be, to that which is divine, while the foul and base are the things that enslave the gentle nature to the wild?
Will he assent or not?"
"He will if he is counselled by me."
"Can it profit any man in the light of this thought to accept gold unjustly if the result is to be that by the acceptance he enslaves the best part of himself to the worst?
Or is it conceivable that, while, if the taking of the gold enslaved his son or daughter and that too to fierce and evil men, it would not profit him, no matter how large the sum, yet that, if the result is to be the ruthless enslavement of the divinest part of himself to the most despicable and godless part, he is not to be deemed wretched and is not taking the golden bribe much more disastrously than Eriphyle did when she received the necklace as the price of her husband's life?"
"Far more," said Glaucon, "for I will answer you in his behalf."
"And do you not think that the reason for the old objection to licentiousness is similarly because that sort of thing emancipates that dread, that huge and manifold beast overmuch?"
"Obviously," he said.
"And do we not censure self-will and irascibility when they foster and intensify disproportionately the element of the lion and the snake in us?"
"By all means."
"And do we not reprobate luxury and effeminacy for their loosening and relaxation of this same element when they engender cowardice in it?"
"Surely."
"And flattery and illiberality when they reduce this same high-spirited element under the rule of the mob-like beast and habituate it for the sake of wealth and the unbridled lusts of the beast to endure all manner of contumely from youth up and become an ape instead of a lion?"
"Yes, indeed," he said.
"And why do you suppose that 'base mechanic' handicraft is a term of reproach?
Shall we not say that it is solely when the best part is naturally weak in a man so that it cannot govern and control the brood of beasts within him but can only serve them and can learn nothing but the ways of flattering them?"
"So it seems," he said.
"Then is it not in order that such an one may have a like government with the best man that we say he ought to be the slave of that best man who has within himself the divine governing principle,
not because we suppose, as Thrasymachus did in the case of subjects, that the slave should be governed for his own harm,
but on the ground that it is better for everyone to be governed by the divine and the intelligent, preferably indwelling and his own, but in default of that imposed from without, in order that we all so far as possible may be akin and friendly because our governance and guidance are the same?"
"Yes, and rightly so," he said.
"And it is plain," I said, "that this is the purpose of the law, which is the ally of all classes in the state, and this is the aim of our control of children, our not leaving them free before we have established, so to speak, a constitutional government within them and, by fostering the best element in them with the aid of the like in ourselves, have set up in its place a similar guardian and ruler in the child, and then, and then only, we leave it free."
"Yes, that is plain," he said.
"In what way, then, Glaucon, and on what principle, shall we say that it profits a man to be unjust or licentious or do any shameful thing that will make him a worse man, but otherwise will bring him more wealth or power?"
"In no way," he said.
"And how that it pays him to escape detection in wrongdoing and not pay the penalty?
Or is it not true that he who evades detection becomes a still worse man, while in the one who is discovered and chastened the brutish part is lulled and tamed and the gentle part liberated, and the entire soul, returning to its nature at the best, attains to a much more precious condition in acquiring sobriety and righteousness together with wisdom, than the body does when it gains strength and beauty conjoined with health, even as the soul is more precious than the body?"
"Most assuredly," he said.
"Then the wise man will bend all his endeavors to this end throughout his life; he will, to begin with, prize the studies that will give this quality to his soul and disprize the others."
"Clearly," he said.
"And then," I said, "he not only will not abandon the habit and nurture of his body to the brutish and irrational pleasure and live with his face set in that direction, but he will not even make health his chief aim, nor give the first place to the ways of becoming strong or healthy or beautiful unless these things are likely to bring with them soberness of spirit, but he will always be found attuning the harmonies of his body for the sake of the concord in his soul."
"By all means," he replied, "if he is to be a true musician."
"And will he not deal likewise with the ordering and harmonizing of his possessions?
He will not let himself be dazzled by the felicitations of the multitude and pile up the mass of his wealth without measure, involving himself in measureless ills."
"No, I think not," he said.
"He will rather," I said, "keep his eyes fixed on the constitution in his soul, and taking care and watching lest he disturb anything there either by excess or deficiency of wealth, will so steer his course and add to or detract from his wealth on this principle, so far as may be."
"Precisely so," he said.
"And in the matter of honors and office too this will be his guiding principle: He will gladly take part in and enjoy those which he thinks will make him a better man, but in public and private life he will shun those that may overthrow the established habit of his soul."
"Then, if that is his chief concern," he said, "he will not willingly take part in politics."
"Yes, by the dog," said I, "in his own city he certainly will, yet perhaps not in the city of his birth, except in some providential conjuncture."
"I understand," he said; "you mean the city whose establishment we have described, the city whose home is in the ideal; for I think that it can be found nowhere on earth."
"Well," said I, "perhaps there is a pattern of it laid up in heaven for him who wishes to contemplate it and so beholding to constitute himself its citizen.
But it makes no difference whether it exists now or ever will come into being.
The politics of this city only will be his and of none other."
"That seems probable," he said.
"And truly," I said, "many other considerations assure me that we were entirely right in our organization of the state, and especially, I think, in the matter of poetry."
"What about it?"
he said.
"In refusing to admit at all so much of it as is imitative; for that it is certainly not to be received is, I think, still more plainly apparent now that we have distinguished the several parts of the soul."
"What do you mean?"
"Why, between ourselves for you will not betray me to the tragic poets and all other imitators that kind of art seems to be a corruption of the mind of all listeners who do not possess, as an antidote a knowledge of its real nature."
"What is your idea in saying this?" he said.
"I must speak out," I said, "though a certain love and reverence for Homer that has possessed me from a boy would stay me from speaking.
For he appears to have been the first teacher and beginner of all these beauties of tragedy.
Yet all the same we must not honor a man above truth, but, as I say, speak our minds."
"By all means," he said.
"Listen, then, or rather, answer my question."
"Ask it."
"Could you tell me in general what imitation is?
For neither do I myself quite apprehend what it would be at."
"It is likely, then," he said, "that I should apprehend!"
"It would be nothing strange," said I, "since it often happens that the dimmer vision sees things in advance of the keener."
"That is so," he said; "but in your presence I could not even be eager to try to state anything that appears to me, but do you yourself consider it."
"Shall we, then, start the inquiry at this point by our customary procedure?
We are in the habit, I take it, of positing a single idea or form in the case of the various multiplicities to which we give the same name.
Do you not understand?"
"I do understand."
"In the present case, then, let us take any multiplicity you please;
for example, there are many couches and tables."
"Of course."
"But these utensils imply, I suppose, only two ideas or forms, one of a couch and one of a table."
"Yes."
"And are we not also in the habit of saying that the craftsman who produces either of them fixes his eyes on the idea or form, and so makes in the one case the couches and in the other the tables that we use, and similarly of other things?
For surely no craftsman makes the idea itself. How could he?"
"By no means."
"But now consider what name you would give to this craftsman."
"What one?"
"Him who makes all the things that all handicraftsmen severally produce."
"A truly clever and wondrous man you tell of."
"Ah, but wait, and you will say so indeed,
for this same handicraftsman is not only able to make all implements, but he produces all plants and animals, including himself, and thereto earth and heaven and the gods and all things in heaven and in Hades under the earth."
"A most marvellous sophist," he said.
"Are you incredulous?"
said I.
"Tell me, do you deny altogether the possibility of such a craftsman, or do you admit that in a sense there could be such a creator of all these things, and in another sense not?
Or do you not perceive that you yourself would be able to make all these things in a way?"
"And in what way, I ask you," he said.
"There is no difficulty," said I, "but it is something that the craftsman can make everywhere and quickly.
You could do it most quickly if you should choose to take a mirror and carry it about everywhere.
You will speedily produce the sun and all the things in the sky, and speedily the earth and yourself and the other animals and implements and plants and all the objects of which we just now spoke."
"Yes," he said, "the appearance of them, but not the reality and the truth."
"Excellent," said I, "and you come to the aid of the argument opportunely.
For I take it that the painter too belongs to this class of producers, does he not?"
"Of course."
"But you will say, I suppose, that his creations are not real and true.
And yet, after a fashion, the painter too makes a couch, does he not?"
"Yes," he said, "the appearance of one, he too."
"What of the cabinet-maker?
Were you not just now saying that he does not make the idea or form which we say is the real couch, the couch in itself, but only some particular couch?"
"Yes, I was saying that."
"Then if he does not make that which really is, he could not be said to make real being but something that resembles real being but is not that.
But if anyone should say that being in the complete sense belongs to the work of the cabinet-maker or to that of any other handicraftsman, it seems that he would say what is not true."
"That would be the view," he said, "of those who are versed in this kind of reasoning."
"We must not be surprised, then, if this too is only a dim adumbration in comparison with reality."
"No, we must not."
"Shall we, then, use these very examples in our quest for the true nature of this imitator?"
"If you please," he said.
"We get, then, these three couches, one, that in nature which, I take it, we would say that God produces,
or who else?"
"No one, I think."
"And then there was one which the carpenter made."
"Yes," he said.
"And one which the painter.
Is not that so?"
"So be it."
"The painter, then, the cabinet-maker, and God, there are these three presiding over three kinds of couches."
"Yes, three."
"Now God, whether because he so willed or because some compulsion was laid upon him not to make more than one couch in nature, so wrought and created one only, the couch which really and in itself is.
But two or more such were never created by God and never will come into being."
"How so?"
he said.
"Because," said I, "if he should make only two, there would again appear one of which they both would possess the form or idea, and that would be the couch that really is in and of itself, and not the other two."
"Right," he said.
"God, then, I take it, knowing this and wishing to be the real author of the couch that has real being and not of some particular couch, nor yet a particular cabinet-maker, produced it in nature unique."
"So it seems."
"Shall we, then, call him its true and natural begetter, or something of the kind?"
"That would certainly be right," he said, "since it is by and in nature that he has made this and all other things."
"And what of the carpenter?
Shall we not call him the creator of a couch?"
"Yes."
"Shall we also say that the painter is the creator and maker of that sort of thing?"
"By no means."
"What will you say he is in relation to the couch?"
"This," said he, "seems to me the most reasonable designation for him, that he is the imitator of the thing which those others produce."
"Very good," said I; "the producer of the product three removes from nature you call the imitator?"
"By all means," he said.
"This, then, will apply to the maker of tragedies also, if he is an imitator and is in his nature three removes from the king and the truth, as are all other imitators."
"It would seem so."
"We are in agreement, then, about the imitator.
But tell me now this about the painter.
Do you think that what he tries to imitate is in each case that thing itself in nature or the works of the craftsmen?"
"The works of the craftsmen," he said.
"Is it the reality of them or the appearance?
Define that further point."
"What do you mean?"
he said.
"This: Does a couch differ from itself according as you view it from the side or the front or in any other way?
Or does it differ not at all in fact though it appears different, and so of other things?"
"That is the way of it," he said: "it appears other but differs not at all."
"Consider, then, this very point.
To which is painting directed in every case, to the imitation of reality as it is or of appearance as it appears? Is it an imitation of a phantasm or of the truth?"
"Of a phantasm," he said.
"Then the mimetic art is far removed from truth, and this, it seems, is the reason why it can produce everything, because it touches or lays hold of only a small part of the object and that a phantom;
as, for example, a painter, we say, will paint us a cobbler, a carpenter, and other craftsmen, though he himself has no expertness in any of these arts, but nevertheless if he were a good painter, by exhibiting at a distance his picture of a carpenter he would deceive children and foolish men, and make them believe it to be a real carpenter."
"Why not?"
"But for all that, my friend, this, I take it, is what we ought to bear in mind in all such cases:
When anyone reports to us of someone, that he has met a man who knows all the crafts and everything else that men severally know, and that there is nothing that he does not know more exactly than anybody else,
our tacit rejoinder must be that he is a simple fellow, who apparently has met some magician or sleight-of-hand man and imitator and has been deceived by him into the belief that he is all-wise, because of his own inability to put to the proof and distinguish knowledge, ignorance and imitation."
"Most true," he said.
"Then," said I, "have we not next to scrutinize tragedy and its leader Homer, since some people tell us that these poets know all the arts and all things human pertaining to virtue and vice, and all things divine?
For the good poet, if he is to poetize things rightly, must, they argue, create with knowledge or else be unable to create. So we must consider whether these critics have not fallen in with such imitators and been deceived by them, so that looking upon their works they cannot perceive that these are three removes from reality, and easy to produce without knowledge of the truth.
For it is phantoms, not realities, that they produce.
Or is there something in their claim, and do good poets really know the things about which the multitude fancy they speak well?"
"We certainly must examine the matter," he said.
"Do you suppose, then, that if a man were able to produce both the exemplar and the semblance, he would be eager to abandon himself to the fashioning of phantoms and set this in the forefront of his life as the best thing he had?"
"I do not."
"But, I take it, if he had genuine knowledge of the things he imitates he would far rather devote himself to real things than to the imitation of them, and would endeavor to leave after him many noble deeds and works as memorials of himself, and would be more eager to be the theme of praise than the praiser."
"I think so," he said; "for there is no parity in the honor and the gain."
"Let us not, then, demand a reckoning from Homer or any other of the poets on other matters by asking them,
if any one of them was a physician and not merely an imitator of a physician's talk, what men any poet, old or new, is reported to have restored to health as Asclepius did, or what disciples of the medical art he left after him as Asclepius did his descendants;
and let us dismiss the other arts and not question them about them;
but concerning the greatest and finest things of which Homer undertakes to speak, wars and generalship and the administration of cities and the education of men, it surely is fair to question him and ask,
'Friend Homer, if you are not at the third remove from truth and reality in human excellence, being merely that creator of phantoms whom we defined as the imitator,
but if you are even in the second place and were capable of knowing what pursuits make men better or worse in private or public life,
tell us what city was better governed owing to you, even as Lacedaemon was because of Lycurgus, and many other cities great and small because of other legislators.
But what city credits you with having been a good legislator and having benefited them?
Italy and Sicily say this of Charondas and we of Solon.
But who says it of you?'
Will he be able to name any?"
"I think not," said Glaucon; "at any rate none is mentioned even by the Homerids themselves."
"Well, then, is there any tradition of a war in Homer's time that was well conducted by his command or counsel?"
"None."
"Well, then, as might be expected of a man wise in practical affairs, are many and ingenious inventions for the arts and business of life reported of Homer as they are of Thales the Milesian and Anacharsis the Scythian?"
"Nothing whatever of the sort."
"Well, then, if no public service is credited to him, is Homer reported while he lived to have been a guide in education to men who took pleasure in associating with him and transmitted to posterity a certain Homeric way of life just as Pythagoras was himself especially honored for this, and his successors, even to this day, denominating a certain way of life the Pythagorean, are distinguished among their contemporaries?"
"No, nothing of this sort either is reported;
for Creophylos, Socrates, the friend of Homer, would perhaps be even more ridiculous than his name as a representative of Homeric culture and education, if what is said about Homer is true.
For the tradition is that Homer was completely neglected in his own lifetime by that friend of the flesh."
"Why, yes, that is the tradition," said I;
"but do you suppose, Glaucon, that, if Homer had really been able to educate men and make them better and had possessed not the art of imitation but real knowledge,
he would not have acquired many companions and been honored and loved by them?
But are we to believe that while Protagoras of Abdera and Prodicus of Ceos and many others are able by private teaching to impress upon their contemporaries the conviction that they will not be capable of governing their homes or the city unless they put them in charge of their education, and make themselves so beloved for this wisdom that their companions all but carry them about on their shoulders,
yet, forsooth, that Homer's contemporaries, if he had been able to help men to achieve excellence, would have suffered him or Hesiod to roam about rhapsodizing and would not have clung to them far rather than to their gold, and constrained them to dwell with them in their homes,
or failing to persuade them, would themselves have escorted them wheresoever they went until they should have sufficiently imbibed their culture?"
"What you say seems to me to be altogether true, Socrates," he said.
"Shall we, then, lay it down that all the poetic tribe, beginning with Homer, are imitators of images of excellence and of the other things that they 'create,' and do not lay hold on truth?
but, as we were just now saying, the painter will fashion, himself knowing nothing of the cobbler's art, what appears to be a cobbler to him and likewise to those who know nothing but judge only by forms and colors?"
"Certainly."
"And similarly, I suppose, we shall say that the poet himself, knowing nothing but how to imitate, lays on with words and phrases the colors of the several arts in such fashion that others equally ignorant, who see things only through words, will deem his words most excellent, whether he speak in rhythm, meter and harmony about cobbling or generalship or anything whatever.
So mighty is the spell that these adornments naturally exercise;
though when they are stripped bare of their musical coloring and taken by themselves, I think you know what sort of a showing these sayings of the poets make.
For you, I believe, have observed them."
"I have," he said.
"Do they not," said I, "resemble the faces of adolescents, young but not really beautiful, when the bloom of youth abandons them?"
"By all means," he said.
"Come, then," said I, "consider this point: The creator of the phantom, the imitator, we say, knows nothing of the reality but only the appearance. Is not that so?"
"Yes."
"Let us not, then, leave it half said but consider it fully."
"Speak on," he said.
"The painter, we say, will paint both reins and a bit."
"Yes."
"But the maker will be the cobbler and the smith."
"Certainly."
"Does the painter, then, know the proper quality of reins and bit?
Or does not even the maker, the cobbler and the smith, know that, but only the man who understands the use of these things, the horseman?"
"Most true."
"And shall we not say that the same holds true of everything?"
"What do you mean?"
"That there are some three arts concerned with everything, the user's art, the maker's, and the imitator's."
"Yes."
"Now do not the excellence, the beauty, the rightness of every implement, living thing, and action refer solely to the use for which each is made or by nature adapted?"
"That is so."
"It quite necessarily follows, then, that the user of anything is the one who knows most of it by experience, and that he reports to the maker the good or bad effects in use of the thing he uses.
As, for example, the flute-player reports to the flute-maker which flutes respond and serve rightly in flute-playing, and will order the kind that must be made, and the other will obey and serve him."
"Of course."
"The one, then, possessing knowledge, reports about the goodness or the badness of the flutes, and the other, believing, will make them."
"Yes."
"Then in respect of the same implement the maker will have right belief about its excellence and defects from association with the man who knows and being compelled to listen to him, but the user will have true knowledge."
"Certainly."
"And will the imitator from experience or use have knowledge whether the things he portrays are or are not beautiful and right, or will he, from compulsory association with the man who knows and taking orders from him for the right making of them, have right opinion?"
"Neither."
"Then the imitator will neither know nor opine rightly concerning the beauty or the badness of his imitations."
"It seems not."
"Most charming, then, would be the state of mind of the poetical imitator in respect of true wisdom about his creations."
"Not at all."
"Yet still he will none the less imitate, though in every case he does not know in what way the thing is bad or good.
But, as it seems, the thing he will imitate will be the thing that appears beautiful to the ignorant multitude."
"Why, what else?"
"On this, then, as it seems, we are fairly agreed, that the imitator knows nothing worth mentioning of the things he imitates, but that imitation is a form of play, not to be taken seriously, and that those who attempt tragic poetry, whether in iambics or heroic verse, are all altogether imitators."
"By all means."
"In heaven's name, then, this business of imitation is concerned with the third remove from truth, is it not?"
"Yes."
"And now again, to what element in man is its function and potency related?"
"Of what are you speaking?"
"Of this: The same magnitude, I presume, viewed from near and from far does not appear equal."
"Why, no."
"And the same things appear bent and straight to those who view them in water and out, or concave and convex, owing to similar errors of vision about colors,
and there is obviously every confusion of this sort in our souls.
And so scene-painting in its exploitation of this weakness of our nature falls nothing short of witchcraft, and so do jugglery and many other such contrivances."
"True."
"And have not measuring and numbering and weighing proved to be most gracious aids to prevent the domination in our soul of the apparently greater or less or more or heavier, and to give the control to that which has reckoned and numbered or even weighed?"
"Certainly."
"But this surely would be the function of the part of the soul that reasons and calculates."
"Why, yes, of that."
"And often when this has measured and declares that certain things are larger or that some are smaller than the others or equal, there is at the same time an appearance of the contrary."
"Yes."
"And did we not say that it is impossible for the same thing at one time to hold contradictory opinions about the same thing?"
"And we were right in affirming that."
"The part of the soul, then, that opines in contradiction of measurement could not be the same with that which conforms to it."
"Why, no."
"But, further, that which puts its trust in measurement and reckoning must be the best part of the soul."
"Surely."
"Then that which opposes it must belong to the inferior elements of the soul."
"Necessarily."
"This, then, was what I wished to have agreed upon when I said that poetry, and in general the mimetic art, produces a product that is far removed from truth in the accomplishment of its task, and associates with the part in us that is remote from intelligence, and is its companion and friend for no sound and true purpose."
"By all means," said he.
"Mimetic art, then, is an inferior thing cohabiting with an inferior and engendering inferior offspring."
"It seems so."
"Does that," said I, "hold only for vision or does it apply also to hearing and to what we call poetry?"
"Presumably," he said, "to that also."
"Let us not, then, trust solely to the plausible analogy from painting, but let us approach in turn that part of the mind to which mimetic poetry appeals and see whether it is the inferior or the nobly serious part."
"So we must."
"Let us, then, put the question thus: Mimetic poetry, we say, imitates human beings acting under compulsion or voluntarily, and as a result of their actions supposing themselves to have fared well or ill and in all this feeling either grief or joy.
Did we find anything else but this?"
"Nothing."
"Is a man, then, in all this of one mind with himself,
or just as in the domain of sight there was faction and strife and he held within himself contrary opinions at the same time about the same things, so also in our actions there is division and strife of the man with himself?
But I recall that there is no need now of our seeking agreement on this point,
for in our former discussion we were sufficiently agreed that our soul at any one moment teems with countless such self-contradictions."
"Rightly," he said.
"Yes, rightly," said I; "but what we then omitted must now, I think, be set forth."
"What is that?"
he said.
"When a good and reasonable man," said I, "experiences such a stroke of fortune as the loss of a son or anything else that he holds most dear, we said, I believe, then too, that he will bear it more easily than the other sort."
"Assuredly."
"But now let us consider this: Will he feel no pain, or, since that is impossible, shall we say that he will in some sort be moderate in his grief?"
"That," he said, "is rather the truth."
"Tell me now this about him: Do you think he will be more likely to resist and fight against his grief when he is observed by his equals or when he is in solitude alone by himself?"
"He will be much more restrained," he said, "when he is on view."
"But when left alone, I fancy, he will permit himself many utterances which, if heard by another, would put him to shame, and will do many things which he would not consent to have another see him doing."
"So it is," he said.
"Now is it not reason and law that exhorts him to resist, while that which urges him to give way to his grief is the bare feeling itself?"
"True."
"And where there are two opposite impulses in a man at the same time about the same thing we say that there must needs be two things in him."
"Of course."
"And is not the one prepared to follow the guidance of the law as the law leads and directs?"
"How so?"
"The law, I suppose, declares that it is best to keep quiet as far as possible in calamity and not to chafe and repine, because we cannot know what is really good and evil in such things and it advantages us nothing to take them hard, and nothing in mortal life is worthy of great concern, and our grieving checks the very thing we need to come to our aid as quickly as possible in such case."
"What thing," he said, "do you mean?"
"To deliberate," I said, "about what has happened to us, and, as it were in the fall of the dice,
to determine the movements of our affairs with reference to the numbers that turn up,
in the way that reason indicates would be the best,
and, instead of stumbling like children, clapping one's hands to the stricken spot and wasting the time in wailing,
ever to accustom the soul to devote itself at once to the curing of the hurt and the raising up of what has fallen, banishing threnody by therapy."
"That certainly," he said, "would be the best way to face misfortune and deal with it."
"Then, we say, the best part of us is willing to conform to these precepts of reason."
"Obviously."
"And shall we not say that the part of us that leads us to dwell in memory on our suffering and impels us to lamentation, and cannot get enough of that sort of thing, is the irrational and idle part of us, the associate of cowardice?"
"Yes, we will say that."
"And does not the fretful part of us present many and varied occasions for imitation, while the intelligent and temperate disposition, always remaining approximately the same, is neither easy to imitate nor to be understood when imitated, especially by a nondescript mob assembled in the theater?
For the representation imitates a type that is alien to them."
"By all means."
"And is it not obvious that the nature of the mimetic poet is not related to this better part of the soul and his cunning is not framed to please it, if he is to win favor with the multitude, but is devoted to the fretful and complicated type of character because it is easy to imitate?"
"It is obvious."
"This consideration, then, makes it right for us to proceed to lay hold of him and set him down as the counterpart of the painter;
for he resembles him in that his creations are inferior in respect of reality;
and the fact that his appeal is to the inferior part of the soul and not to the best part is another point of resemblance.
And so we may at last say that we should be justified in not admitting him into a well-ordered state, because he stimulates and fosters this element in the soul,
and by strengthening it tends to destroy the rational part,
just as when in a state one puts bad men in power and turns the city over to them and ruins the better sort.
Precisely in the same manner we shall say that the mimetic poet sets up in each individual soul a vicious constitution by fashioning phantoms far removed from reality, and by currying favor with the senseless element that cannot distinguish the greater from the less, but calls the same thing now one, now the other."
"By all means."
"But we have not yet brought our chief accusation against it.
Its power to corrupt, with rare exceptions, even the better sort is surely the chief cause for alarm."
"How could it be otherwise, if it really does that?"
"Listen and reflect.
I think you know that the very best of us, when we hear Homer or some other of the makers of tragedy imitating one of the heroes who is in grief, and is delivering a long tirade in his lamentations or chanting and beating his breast, feel pleasure, and abandon ourselves and accompany the representation with sympathy and eagerness, and we praise as an excellent poet the one who most strongly affects us in this way."
"I do know it, of course."
"But when in our own lives some affliction comes to us, you are also aware that we plume ourselves upon the opposite, on our ability to remain calm and endure, in the belief that this is the conduct of a man, and what we were praising in the theatre that of a woman."
"I do note that."
"Do you think, then," said I, "that this praise is rightfully bestowed when, contemplating a character that we would not accept but would be ashamed of in ourselves, we do not abominate it but take pleasure and approve?"
"No, by Zeus," he said, "it does not seem reasonable."
"O yes," said I, "if you would consider it in this way."
"In what way?"
"If you would reflect that the part of the soul that in the former case, in our own misfortunes, was forcibly restrained, and that has hungered for tears and a good cry and satisfaction, because it is its nature to desire these things, is the element in us that the poets satisfy and delight,
and that the best element in our nature,
since it has never been properly educated by reason or even by habit,
then relaxes its guard over the plaintive part,
inasmuch as this is contemplating the woes of others and it is no shame to it to praise and pity another who, claiming to be a good man, abandons himself to excess in his grief;
but it thinks this vicarious pleasure is so much clear gain, and would not consent to forfeit it by disdaining the poem altogether.
That is, I think, because few are capable of reflecting that what we enjoy in others will inevitably react upon ourselves.
For after feeding fat the emotion of pity there, it is not easy to restrain it in our own sufferings."
"Most true," he said.
"Does not the same principle apply to the laughable,
namely, that if in comic representations, or for that matter in private talk, you take intense pleasure in buffooneries that you would blush to practise yourself, and do not detest them as base, you are doing the same thing as in the case of the pathetic?
For here again what your reason, for fear of the reputation of buffoonery, restrained in yourself when it fain would play the clown, you release in turn, and so, fostering its youthful impudence, let yourself go so far that often ere you are aware you become yourself a comedian in private."
"Yes, indeed," he said.
"And so in regard to the emotions of sex and anger, and all the appetites and pains and pleasures of the soul which we say accompany all our actions, the effect of poetic imitation is the same.
For it waters and fosters these feelings when what we ought to do is to dry them up, and it establishes them as our rulers when they ought to be ruled, to the end that we may be better and happier men instead of worse and more miserable."
"I cannot deny it," said he.
"Then, Glaucon," said I, "when you meet encomiasts of Homer who tell us that this poet has been the educator of Hellas, and that for the conduct and refinement of human life he is worthy of our study and devotion, and that we should order our entire lives by the guidance of this poet,
we must love and salute them as doing the best they can, and concede to them that Homer is the most poetic of poets and the first of tragedians,
but we must know the truth, that we can admit no poetry into our city save only hymns to the gods and the praises of good men.
For if you grant admission to the honeyed muse in lyric or epic, pleasure and pain will be lords of your city instead of law and that which shall from time to time have approved itself to the general reason as the best."
"Most true," he said.
"Let us, then, conclude our return to the topic of poetry and our apology, and affirm that we really had good grounds then for dismissing her from our city, since such was her character.
For reason constrained us.
And let us further say to her, lest she condemn us for harshness and rusticity, that there is from of old a quarrel between philosophy and poetry.
For such expressions as "'the yelping hound barking at her master and mighty in the idle babble" "of fools,'" and "'the mob that masters those who are too wise for their own good,'" and the subtle thinkers who reason that after all they are poor, and countless others are tokens of this ancient enmity.
But nevertheless let it be declared that, if the mimetic and dulcet poetry can show any reason for her existence in a well-governed state, we would gladly admit her, since we ourselves are very conscious of her spell.
But all the same it would be impious to betray what we believe to be the truth.
Is not that so, friend?
Do not you yourself feel her magic and especially when Homer is her interpreter?"
"Greatly."
"Then may she not justly return from this exile after she has pleaded her defence, whether in lyric or other measure?"
"By all means."
"And we would allow her advocates who are not poets but lovers of poetry to plead her cause in prose without metre, and show that she is not only delightful but beneficial to orderly government and all the life of man.
And we shall listen benevolently,
for it will be clear gain for us if it can be shown that she bestows not only pleasure but benefit."
"How could we help being the gainers?" said he.
"But if not, my friend, even as men who have fallen in love, if they think that the love is not good for them, hard though it be, nevertheless refrain,
so we, owing to the love of this kind of poetry inbred in us by our education in these fine polities of ours, will gladly have the best possible case made out for her goodness and truth,
but so long as she is unable to make good her defense we shall chant over to ourselves as we listen the reasons that we have given as a counter-charm to her spell, to preserve us from slipping back into the childish loves of the multitude;
for we have come to see that we must not take such poetry seriously as a serious thing that lays hold on truth, but that he who lends an ear to it must be on his guard fearing for the polity in his soul and must believe what we have said about poetry."
"By all means," he said, "I concur."
"Yes, for great is the struggle," I said, "dear Glaucon, a far greater contest than we think it, that determines whether a man prove good or bad, so that not the lure of honor or wealth or any office, no, nor of poetry either, should incite us to be careless of righteousness and all excellence."
"I agree with you," he replied, "in view of what we have set forth, and I think that anyone else would do so too."
"And yet," said I, "the greatest rewards of virtue and the prizes proposed for her we have not set forth."
"You must have in mind an inconceivable magnitude," he replied, "if there are other things greater than those of which we have spoken.?
For surely the whole time from the boy to the old man would be small compared with all time."
"Nay, it is nothing," he said.
"What then?
Do you think that an immortal thing ought to be seriously concerned for such a little time, and not rather for all time?"
"I think so," he said; "but what is this that you have in mind?"
"Have you never perceived," said I, "that our soul is immortal and never perishes?"
And he, looking me full in the face in amazement, said, "No, by Zeus, not I; but are you able to declare this?"
"I certainly ought to be," said I,
"and I think you too can, for it is nothing hard."
"It is for me," he said; "and I would gladly hear from you this thing that is not hard."
"Listen," said I.
"Just speak on," he replied.
"You speak of good and evil, do you not?"
"I do."
"Is your notion of them the same as mine?"
"What is it?"
"That which destroys and corrupts in every case is the evil; that which preserves and benefits is the good."
"Yes, I think so," he said.
"How about this:
Do you say that there is for everything its special good and evil,
as for example for the eyes ophthalmia, for the entire body disease, for grain mildew, rotting for wood, rust for bronze and iron, and, as I say, for practically everything its congenital evil and disease?"
"I do," he said.
"Then when one of these evils comes to anything does it not make the thing to which it attaches itself bad, and finally disintegrate and destroy it?"
"Of course."
"Then the congenital evil of each thing and its own vice destroys it, or if that is not going to destroy it, nothing else remains that could;
for obviously the good will never destroy anything, nor yet again will that which is neutral and neither good nor evil."
"How could it?"
he said.
"If, then, we discover anything that has an evil which vitiates it, yet is not able to dissolve and destroy it, shall we not thereupon know that of a thing so constituted there can be no destruction?"
"That seems likely," he said.
"Well, then," said I, "has not the soul something that makes it evil?"
"Indeed it has," he said, "all the things that we were just now enumerating, injustice and licentiousness and cowardice and ignorance."
"Does any one of these things dissolve and destroy it?
And reflect, lest we be misled by supposing that when an unjust and foolish man is taken in his injustice he is then destroyed by the injustice, which is the vice of soul.
But conceive it thus:
Just as the vice of body which is disease wastes and destroys it so that it no longer is a body at all, in like manner in all the examples of which we spoke it is the specific evil which, by attaching itself to the thing and dwelling in it with power to corrupt, reduces it to nonentity. Is not that so?"
"Yes."
"Come, then, and consider the soul in the same way.
Do injustice and other wickedness dwelling in it, by their indwelling and attachment to it, corrupt and wither it till they bring it to death and separate it from the body?"
"They certainly do not do that," he said.
"But surely," said I, "it is unreasonable to suppose that the vice of something else destroys a thing while its own does not."
"Yes, unreasonable."
"For observe, Glaucon," said I, "that we do not think it proper to say of the body either that it is destroyed by the badness of foods themselves, whether it be staleness or rottenness or whatever it is;
but when the badness of the foods themselves engenders in the body the defect of body, then we shall say that it is destroyed owing to these foods, but by its own vice, which is disease.
But the body being one thing and the foods something else, we shall never expect the body to be destroyed by their badness, that is by an alien evil that has not produced in it the evil that belongs to it by nature."
"You are entirely right," he replied.
"On the same principle," said I, "if the badness of the body does not produce in the soul the soul's badness we shall never expect the soul to be destroyed by an alien evil apart from its own defect one thing, that is, by the evil of another."
"That is reasonable," he said.
"Either, then, we must refute this and show that we are mistaken,
or, so long as it remains unrefuted, we must never say that by fever or any other disease, or yet by the knife at the throat or the chopping to bits of the entire body, there is any more likelihood of the soul perishing because of these things,
until it is proved that owing to these affections of the body the soul itself becomes more unjust and unholy.
But when an evil of something else occurs in a different thing and the evil that belongs to the thing is not engendered in it,
we must not suffer it to be said that the soul or anything else is in this way destroyed."
"But you may be sure," he said, "that nobody will ever prove this, that the souls of the dying are made more unjust by death."
"But if anyone," said I, "dares to come to grips with the argument and say, in order to avoid being forced to admit the soul's immortality, that a dying man does become more wicked and unjust,
we will postulate that, if what he says is true, injustice must be fatal to its possessor as if it were a disease, and that those who catch it die because it kills them by its own inherent nature, those who have most of it quickest, and those who have less more slowly, and not, as now in fact happens, that the unjust die owing to this but by the action of others who inflict the penalty."
"Nay, by Zeus," he said, "injustice will not appear a very terrible thing after all if it is going to be fatal to its possessor,
for that would be a release from all troubles.
But I rather think it will prove to be quite the contrary, something that kills others when it can, but renders its possessor very lively indeed, and not only lively but wakeful,
so far, I think, does it dwell from deadliness."
"You say well," I replied;
"for when the natural vice and the evil proper to it cannot kill and destroy the soul, still less will the evil appointed for the destruction of another thing destroy the soul or anything else, except that for which it is appointed."
"Still less indeed," he said, "in all probability."
"Then since it is not destroyed by any evil whatever, either its own or alien, it is evident that it must necessarily exist always, and that if it always exists it is immortal."
"Necessarily," he said.
"Let this, then," I said, "be assumed to be so.
But if it is so, you will observe that these souls must always be the same.
For if none perishes they could not, I suppose, become fewer nor yet more numerous.
For if any class of immortal things increased you are aware that its increase would come from the mortal and all things would end by becoming immortal."
"You say truly."
"But," said I, "we must not suppose this, for reason will not suffer it nor yet must we think that in its truest nature the soul is the kind of thing that teems with infinite diversity and unlikeness and contradiction in and with itself."
"How am I to understand that?"
he said.
"It is not easy," said I, "for a thing to be immortal that is composed of many elements not put together in the best way, as now appeared to us to be the case with the soul."
"It is not likely."
"Well, then, that the soul is immortal our recent argument and our other proofs would constrain us to admit.
But to know its true nature we must view it not marred by communion with the body and other miseries as we now contemplate it, but consider adequately in the light of reason what it is when it is purified, and then you will find it to be a far more beautiful thing and will more clearly distinguish justice and injustice and all the matters that we have now discussed.
But though we have stated the truth of its present appearance,
its condition as we have now contemplated it resembles that of the sea-god Glaucus whose first nature can hardly be made out by those who catch glimpses of him,
because the original members of his body are broken off and mutilated and crushed and in every way marred by the waves,
and other parts have attached themselves to him, accretions of shells and sea-weed and rocks,
so that he is more like any wild creature than what he was by nature even such, I say, is our vision of the soul marred by countless evils.
But we must look elsewhere, Glaucon."
"Where?"
said he.
"To its love of wisdom.
And we must note the things of which it has apprehensions, and the associations for which it yearns, as being itself akin to the divine and the immortal and to eternal being,
and so consider what it might be if it followed the gleam unreservedly and were raised by this impulse out of the depths of this sea in which it is now sunk, and were cleansed and scraped free of the rocks and barnacles which, because it now feasts on earth, cling to it in wild profusion of earthy and stony accretion by reason of these feastings that are accounted happy.
And then one might see whether in its real nature it is manifold or single in its simplicity, or what is the truth about it and how.
But for the present we have, I think, fairly well described its sufferings and the forms it assumes in this human life of ours."
"We certainly have," he said.
"Then," said I, "we have met all the other demands of the argument, and we have not invoked the rewards and reputes of justice as you said Homer and Hesiod do, but we have proved that justice in itself is the best thing for the soul itself, and that the soul ought to do justice whether it possess the ring of Gyges or not, or the helmet of Hades to boot."
"Most true," he said.
"Then," said I, "Glaucon, there can no longer be any objection, can there, to our assigning to justice and virtue generally, in addition, all the various rewards and wages that they bring to the soul from men and gods, both while the man still lives and, after his death?"
"There certainly can be none," he said.
"Will you, then, return to me what you borrowed in the argument?"
"What, pray?"
"I granted to you that the just man should seem and be thought to be unjust and the unjust just; for you thought that, even if the concealment of these things from gods and men was an impossibility in fact, nevertheless, it ought to be conceded for the sake of the argument, in order that the decision might be made between absolute justice and absolute injustice.
Or do you not remember?"
"It would be unjust of me," he said, "if I did not."
"Well, then, now that they have been compared and judged, I demand back from you in behalf of justice the repute that she in fact enjoys from gods and men, and I ask that we admit that she is thus esteemed in order that she may gather in the prizes which she wins from the seeming and bestows on her possessors, since she has been proved to bestow the blessings that come from the reality and not to deceive those who truly seek and win her."
"That is a just demand," he said.
"Then," said I, "will not the first of these restorations be that the gods certainly are not unaware of the true character of each of the two, the just and the unjust?"
"We will restore that," he said.
"And if they are not concealed, the one will be dear to the gods and the other hateful to them, as we agreed in the beginning."
"That is so."
"And shall we not agree that all things that come from the gods work together for the best for him that is dear to the gods, apart from the inevitable evil caused by sin in a former life?"
"By all means."
"This, then, must be our conviction about the just man, that whether he fall into poverty or disease or any other supposed evil, for him all these things will finally prove good, both in life and in death.
For by the gods assuredly that man will never be neglected who is willing and eager to be righteous, and by the practice of virtue to be likened unto god so far as that is possible for man."
"It is reasonable," he said, "that such a one should not be neglected by his like."
"And must we not think the opposite of the unjust man?"
"Most emphatically."
"Such then are the prizes of victory which the gods bestow upon the just."
"So I think, at any rate," he said.
"But what," said I, "does he receive from men?
Is not this the case, if we are now to present the reality?
Do not your smart but wicked men fare as those racers do who run well from the scratch but not back from the turn?
They bound nimbly away at the start, but in the end are laughed to scorn and run off the field uncrowned and with their ears on their shoulders.
But the true runners when they have come to the goal receive the prizes and bear away the crown.
Is not this the usual outcome for the just also, that towards the end of every action and association and of life as a whole they have honor and bear away the prizes from men?"
"So it is indeed."
"Will you, then, bear with me if I say of them all that you said of the unjust?
For I am going to say that the just, when they become older, hold the offices in their own city if they choose, marry from what families they will, and give their children in marriage to what families they please,
and everything that you said of the one I now repeat of the other;
and in turn I will say of the unjust that the most of them, even if they escape detection in youth, at the end of their course are caught and derided, and their old age is made miserable by the contumelies of strangers and townsfolk.
They are lashed and suffer all things which you truly said are unfit for ears polite.
Suppose yourself to have heard from me a repetition of all that they suffer.
But, as I say, consider whether you will bear with me."
"Assuredly," he said, "for what you say is just."
"Such then while he lives are the prizes, the wages, and the gifts that the just man receives from gods and men in addition to those blessings which justice herself bestowed."
"And right fair and abiding rewards," he said.
"Well, these," I said, "are nothing in number and magnitude compared with those that await both after death.
And we must listen to the tale of them," said I, "in order that each may have received in full what is due to be said of him by our argument."
"Tell me," he said, "since there are not many things to which I would more gladly listen."
"It is not, let me tell you," said I, "the tale to Alcinous told that I shall unfold, but the tale of a warrior bold, Er, the son of Armenius, by race a Pamphylian.
He once upon a time was slain in battle, and when the corpses were taken up on the tenth day already decayed, was found intact, and having been brought home, at the moment of his funeral, on the twelfth day as he lay upon the pyre, revived, and after coming to life related what, he said, he had seen in the world beyond.
He said that when his soul went forth from his body he journeyed with a great company
and that they came to a mysterious region where there were two openings side by side in the earth,
and above and over against them in the heaven two others,
and that judges were sitting between these,
and that after every judgement they bade the righteous journey to the right and upwards through the heaven with tokens attached to them in front of the judgement passed upon them, and the unjust to take the road to the left and downward, they too wearing behind signs of all that had befallen them,
and that when he himself drew near they told him that he must be the messenger to mankind to tell them of that other world,
and they charged him to give ear and to observe everything in the place.
And so he said that here he saw, by each opening of heaven and earth, the souls departing after judgement had been passed upon them,
while, by the other pair of openings, there came up from the one in the earth souls full of squalor and dust, and from the second there came down from heaven a second procession of souls clean and pure,
and that those which arrived from time to time appeared to have come as it were from a long journey and gladly departed to the meadow and encamped there as at a festival,
and acquaintances greeted one another, and those which came from the earth questioned the others about conditions up yonder, and those from heaven asked how it fared with those others.
And they told their stories to one another, the one lamenting and wailing as they recalled how many and how dreadful things they had suffered and seen in their journey beneath the earth
it lasted a thousand years
while those from heaven related their delights and visions of a beauty beyond words.
To tell it all, Glaucon, would take all our time, but the sum, he said, was this.
For all the wrongs they had ever done to anyone and all whom they had severally wronged they had paid the penalty in turn tenfold for each,
and the measure of this was by periods of a hundred years each,
so that on the assumption that this was the length of human life the punishment might be ten times the crime;
as for example that if anyone had been the cause of many deaths or had betrayed cities and armies and reduced them to slavery, or had been participant in any other iniquity,
they might receive in requital pains tenfold for each of these wrongs, and again if any had done deeds of kindness and been just and holy men they might receive their due reward in the same measure;
and other things not worthy of record he said of those who had just been born and lived but a short time;
and he had still greater requitals to tell of piety and impiety towards the gods and parents and of self-slaughter.
For he said that he stood by when one was questioned by another 'Where is Ardiaeus the Great?'
Now this Ardiaeos had been tyrant in a certain city of Pamphylia just a thousand years before that time
and had put to death his old father and his elder brother, and had done many other unholy deeds, as was the report.
So he said that the one questioned replied, 'He has not come,' said he, 'nor will he be likely to come here.
"'For indeed this was one of the dreadful sights we beheld;
when we were near the mouth and about to issue forth and all our other sufferings were ended,
we suddenly caught sight of him and of others,
the most of them, I may say, tyrants.
But there were some of private station, of those who had committed great crimes.
And when these supposed that at last they were about to go up and out, the mouth would not receive them,
but it bellowed when anyone of the incurably wicked or of those who had not completed their punishment tried to come up.
And thereupon,' he said, 'savage men of fiery aspect who stood by and took note of the voice laid hold on them and bore them away.
But Ardiaeus and others they bound hand and foot and head and flung down and flayed them and dragged them by the wayside, carding them on thorns
and signifying to those who from time to time passed by for what cause they were borne away, and that they were to be hurled into Tartarus.
And then, though many and manifold dread things had befallen them, this fear exceeded all lest each one should hear the voice when he tried to go up,
and each went up most gladly when it had kept silence.
And the judgements and penalties were somewhat after this manner, and the blessings were their counterparts.
But when seven days had elapsed for each group in the meadow, they were required to rise up on the eighth and journey on,
and they came in four days to a spot whence they discerned, extended from above throughout the heaven and the earth, a straight light like a pillar, most nearly resembling the rainbow, but brighter and purer.
To this they came after going forward a day's journey,
and they saw there at the middle of the light the extremities of its fastenings stretched from heaven;
for this light was the girdle of the heavens like the undergirders of triremes, holding together in like manner the entire revolving vault.
And from the extremities was stretched the spindle of Necessity, through which all the orbits turned.
Its staff and its hook were made of adamant, and the whorl of these and other kinds was commingled.
And the nature of the whorl was this:
Its shape was that of those in our world, but from his description we must conceive it to be as if in one great whorl, hollow and scooped out, there lay enclosed, right through, another like it but smaller, fitting into it as boxes that fit into one another, and in like manner another, a third, and a fourth, and four others,
for there were eight of the whorls in all, lying within one another, showing their rims as circles from above and forming the continuous back of a single whorl about the shaft, which was driven home through the middle of the eighth.
Now the first and outmost whorl had the broadest circular rim, that of the sixth was second, and third was that of the fourth, and fourth was that of the eighth, fifth that of the seventh, sixth that of the fifth, seventh that of the third, eighth that of the second;
and that of the greatest was spangled, that of the seventh brightest, that of the eighth took its color from the seventh, which shone upon it.
The colors of the second and fifth were like one another and more yellow than the two former.
The third had the whitest color, and the fourth was of a slightly ruddy hue;
the sixth was second in whiteness.
The staff turned as a whole in a circle with the same movement, but within the whole as it revolved the seven inner circles revolved gently in the opposite direction to the whole, and of these seven the eighth moved most swiftly, and next and together with one another the seventh, sixth and fifth; and third in swiftness, as it appeared to them, moved the fourth with returns upon itself, and fourth the third and fifth the second.
And the spindle turned on the knees of Necessity,
and up above on each of the rims of the circles a Siren stood, borne around in its revolution and uttering one sound, one note, and from all the eight there was the concord of a single harmony.
And there were another three who sat round about at equal intervals, each one on her throne, the Fates, daughters of Necessity, clad in white vestments with filleted heads, Lachesis, and Clotho, and Atropos, who sang in unison with the music of the Sirens, Lachesis singing the things that were, Clotho the things that are, and Atropos the things that are to be.
And Clotho with the touch of her right hand helped to turn the outer circumference of the spindle, pausing from time to time.
Atropos with her left hand in like manner helped to turn the inner circles,
and Lachesis alternately with either hand lent a hand to each.
"Now when they arrived they were straight-way bidden to go before Lachesis,
and then a certain prophet first marshalled them in orderly intervals, and thereupon took from the lap of Lachesis lots and patterns of lives and went up to a lofty platform and spoke,
'This is the word of Lachesis, the maiden daughter of Necessity,
"Souls that live for a day, now is the beginning of another cycle of mortal generation where birth is the beacon of death.
No divinity shall cast lots for you, but you shall choose your own deity.
Let him to whom falls the first lot first select a life to which he shall cleave of necessity.
But virtue has no master over her, and each shall have more or less of her as he honors her or does her despite.
The blame is his who chooses: God is blameless."'
So saying, the prophet flung the lots out among them all, and each took up the lot that fell by his side, except himself; him they did not permit.
And whoever took up a lot saw plainly what number he had drawn.
And after this again the prophet placed the patterns of lives before them on the ground, far more numerous than the assembly.
They were of every variety,
for there were lives of all kinds of animals and all sorts of human lives,
for there were tyrannies among them, some uninterrupted till the end and others destroyed midway and issuing in penuries and exiles and beggaries;
and there were lives of men of repute for their forms and beauty and bodily strength otherwise and prowess and the high birth and the virtues of their ancestors, and others of ill repute in the same things, and similarly of women.
But there was no determination of the quality of soul, because the choice of a different life inevitably determined a different character.
But all other things were commingled with one another and with wealth and poverty and sickness and health and the intermediate conditions.
And there, dear Glaucon, it appears, is the supreme hazard for a man.
And this is the chief reason why it should be our main concern that each of us, neglecting all other studies, should seek after and study this thing
if in any way he may be able to learn of and discover the man who will give him the ability and the knowledge to distinguish the life that is good from that which is bad,
and always and everywhere to choose the best that the conditions allow,
and, taking into account all the things of which we have spoken and estimating the effect on the goodness of his life of their conjunction or their severance, to know how beauty commingled with poverty or wealth and combined with what habit of soul operates for good or for evil, and what are the effects of high and low birth and private station and office and strength and weakness and quickness of apprehension and dullness and all similar natural and acquired habits of the soul,
when blended and combined with one another,
so that with consideration of all these things he will be able to make a reasoned choice between the better and the worse life, with his eyes fixed on the nature of his soul, naming the worse life that which will tend to make it more unjust and the better that which will make it more just.
But all other considerations he will dismiss, for we have seen that this is the best choice, both for life and death.
And a man must take with him to the house of death an adamantine faith in this, that even there he may be undazzled by riches and similar trumpery,
and may not precipitate himself into tyrannies and similar doings and so work many evils past cure and suffer still greater himself, but may know how always to choose in such things the life that is seated in the mean and shun the excess in either direction, both in this world so far as may be and in all the life to come; for this is the greatest happiness for man.
"And at that time also the messenger from that other world reported that the prophet spoke thus:
'Even for him who comes forward last, if he make his choice wisely and live strenuously, there is reserved an acceptable life, no evil one.
Let not the foremost in the choice be heedless nor the last be discouraged.'
When the prophet had thus spoken he said that the drawer of the first lot at once sprang to seize the greatest tyranny,
and that in his folly and greed he chose it without sufficient examination,
and failed to observe that it involved the fate of eating his own children, and other horrors,
and that when he inspected it at leisure he beat his breast and bewailed his choice, not abiding by the forewarning of the prophet.
For he did not blame himself for his woes, but fortune and the gods and anything except himself.
He was one of those who had come down from heaven, a man who had lived in a well-ordered polity in his former existence, participating in virtue by habit and not by philosophy;
and one may perhaps say that a majority of those who were thus caught were of the company that had come from heaven, inasmuch as they were unexercised in suffering.
But the most of those who came up from the earth, since they had themselves suffered and seen the sufferings of others, did not make their choice precipitately.
For which reason also there was an interchange of good and evil for most of the souls, as well as because of the chances of the lot.
Yet if at each return to the life of this world a man loved wisdom sanely, and the lot of his choice did not fall out among the last,
we may venture to affirm, from what was reported thence, that not only will he be happy here but that the path of his journey thither and the return to this world will not be underground and rough but smooth and through the heavens.
For he said that it was a sight worth seeing to observe how the several souls selected their lives.
He said it was a strange, pitiful, and ridiculous spectacle,
as the choice was determined for the most part by the habits of their former lives.
He saw the soul that had been Orpheus', he said, selecting the life of a swan, because from hatred of the tribe of women, owing to his death at their hands, it was unwilling to be conceived and born of a woman.
He saw the soul of Thamyras choosing the life of a nightingale;
and he saw a swan changing to the choice of the life of man, and similarly other musical animals.
The soul that drew the twentieth lot chose the life of a lion;
it was the soul of Ajax, the son of Telamon
The next, the soul of Agamemnon,
likewise from hatred of the human race because of its sufferings, substituted the life of an eagle.
Drawing one of the middle lots the soul of Atalanta caught sight of the great honors attached to an athlete's life and could not pass them by but snatched at them.
After her, he said, he saw the soul of Epeius, the son of Panopeus, entering into the nature of an arts and crafts woman.
Far off in the rear he saw the soul of the buffoon Thersites clothing itself in the body of an ape.
And it fell out that the soul of Odysseus drew the last lot of all and came to make its choice,
and, from memory of its former toils having flung away ambition, went about for a long time in quest of the life of an ordinary citizen who minded his own business,
and with difficulty found it lying in some corner disregarded by the others, and upon seeing it said that it would have done the same had it drawn the first lot, and chose it gladly.
And in like manner, of the other beasts some entered into men and into one another, the unjust into wild creatures, the just transformed to tame, and there was every kind of mixture and combination.
But when, to conclude, all the souls had chosen their lives in the order of their lots, they were marshalled and went before Lachesis.
And she sent with each, as the guardian of his life and the fulfiller of his choice, the genius that he had chosen,
and this divinity led the soul first to Clotho, under her hand and her turning of the spindle to ratify the destiny of his lot and choice;
and after contact with her the genius again led the soul to the spinning of Atropos to make the web of its destiny irreversible,
and then without a backward look it passed beneath the throne of Necessity.
And after it had passed through that, when the others also had passed,
they all journeyed to the Plain of Oblivion, through a terrible and stifling heat,
for it was bare of trees and all plants,
and there they camped at eventide by the River of Forgetfulness, whose waters no vessel can contain.
They were all required to drink a measure of the water,
and those who were not saved by their good sense drank more than the measure,
and each one as he drank forgot all things.
And after they had fallen asleep and it was the middle of the night, there was a sound of thunder and a quaking of the earth,
and they were suddenly wafted thence, one this way, one that, upward to their birth like shooting stars.
He himself, he said, was not allowed to drink of the water,
yet how and in what way he returned to the body he said he did not know,
but suddenly recovering his sight he saw himself at dawn lying on the funeral pyre.
And so, Glaucon, the tale was saved, as the saying is, and was not lost.
And it will save us if we believe it,
and we shall safely cross the River of Lethe, and keep our soul unspotted from the world.
But if we are guided by me we shall believe that the soul is immortal and capable of enduring all extremes of good and evil,
and so we shall hold ever to the upward way and pursue righteousness with wisdom always and ever, that we may be dear to ourselves and to the gods both during our sojourn here and when we receive our reward, as the victors in the games go about to gather in theirs.
And thus both here and in that journey of a thousand years, whereof I have told you, we shall fare well.
